40 Years of Worry Barometer CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
075360 E
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
4/2016
Stability
What Keeps the World in Balance
Gold has been the strongest currency since 2001 B. C. and is therefore considered a solid long-term investment.
As a leading precious metals trader in Europe, and operating independently outside of the banking system, Degussa is able to offer you comprehensive advice in our Swiss branches in Zurich and Geneva.
Here, we can help you compile your personal investment portfolio with a wide selection of Degussa-branded gold bars which include a bank security number.
We also offer bullion coins as an alternative investment opportunity.
In addition, we have collectible coins and high carat precious metal gifts.
For safe storage, we offer state-of-the-art safe deposit box facilities protecting your assets 24/7.
Further information and online shop at:
Bleicherweg 41 · 8002 Zurich Telephone:
044 403 41 10 Quai du Mont-Blanc 5 · 1201 Geneva Telephone:
022 908 14 00
Z u r i c h I G e n e v a I F r a n k f u r t I M a d r i d I S i n g a p o r e I L o n d o n
— Editorial —
The Greatest Good?
Contributors to this issue:
1 – Peter Langer Peter Langer, a Berlin-based photographer, specializes in images of objects.
His work has been published in Zeit Magazine for many years.
Among his subjects:
clothing, shoes, a strangely disorienting close-up of a piece of jewelry and – as in this issue – unusual kinds of fabrics and materials.
Page 16
2 – Beatrice Schlag Beatrice Schlag is one of the great names in Swiss journalism.
For decades she has reported on the inner workings of human existence for such publications as NZZ Folio, Das Magazin and Die Weltwoche.
In this issue, she looks at why some people are particularly resilient in dealing with traumatic experiences.
Page 30
3 – Herbert Cerutti Herbert Cerutti, an experimental physicist, has won numerous awards for his work as a journalist.
As science editor for the newspaper NZZ, Cerutti developed a special interest in the secrets of the animal kingdom.
In this issue, he describes how creatures large and small cope with difficult situations.
Page 38
4 – René P. Buholzer René P. Buholzer is head of the Public Policy unit at Credit Suisse (Schweiz) AG and is responsible for global sustainability issues.
He holds a PhD in political science.
In this issue he looks at the mood of Switzerland ’s citizens as reflected in the results of the Worry Baro meter, a Credit Suisse survey that has been conducted since 1976.
Page 50
We live in a time of turbulence and uncertainty.
But it is also a time of enormous opportunity.
And it is a time when we are yearning for familiar values, for security, permanence – in a word, for stability.
This issue of Bulletin explores various types of stability.
Thomas Gottstein, CEO of the new Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd., explains why an uncertain global climate may offer advantages for Switzerland – and how participating in elite sports has made him, personally, more resilient.
He says, “We want to be the best bank in Switzerland” (page 6).
An in-depth story in this issue examines how some people are able to overcome serious challenges and traumatic experiences, such as a plane crash, a cancer diagnosis or being driven from their homeland (page 30) – and why others cannot.
In our interview, Annemarie Huber-Hotz, president of the Swiss Red Cross, affirms Switzerland ’s current policy on refugees and tells us what it takes, in her view, for a local population and newcomers to live together in harmony – in other words, how a society can maintain its equilibrium (page 24).
And finally, a milestone:
Credit Suisse ’s Worry Barometer, one of the oldest and largest surveys of the Swiss population, is celebrating its 40th birthday.
To mark this occasion, we show how the worries of Switzerland ’s citizens have changed over the years, from 1976 to the present day (page 49).
A striking feature of this year ’s results is that no single concern seems to be more urgent than the others, and that the country is optimistic about the future.
“Security and peace” are what define Switzerland, according to survey respondents.
And that means stability.
Your editorial team
Cover:
Michael O’Neill, www.michaeloneill.com, from the book “On Yoga:
The Architecture of Peace” (Taschen) Bulletin 4/2016 — 1
“She has so much of me.
And one day she will also have the assets.”
No matter what comes your way.
credit-suisse.
com
This document qualifies as marketing material that has been published for advertising purposes.
Copyright © 2016 Credit Suisse Group AG and/or its affiliates.
All rights reserved.
— Stability —
Contents
4 World Stability Map
What Barbados, Singapore and Uruguay have in common.
6 “We want to be more Swiss again” Thomas Gottstein, CEO of the new Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd., in an in-depth interview.
12 Wanted:
Anchors
The Swiss National Bank and the pitfalls of the independent franc.
15 Instability:
Yes, but …
Uncertainty is not the end of economic growth.
16 Eternal Values
A picture puzzle of industrial production.
24 “Solidarity does n’t depend on prosperity” Swiss Red Cross President Annemarie Huber-Hotz on the role of humanity.
28 Till the End of Time …
What scientists have learned about the recipe for lasting love.
30 The Astonishing Power of the Soul The phenomenon of resilience.
38 Natural-Born Grippers
Why goats can climb trees and geckos never lose their grip.
40 “Globalization has a bitter aftertaste” A gloomy conversation with historian Harold James – and a glimmer of hope.
46 An Out-of-Kilter Survival Artist The Leaning Tower of Pisa and the importance of a solid foundation.
48 Letters to the Editor/Publishing Information The leaning tower is now safe for the next three hundred years – at least according to the engineers.
– p.
46 Credit Suisse — Worry Barometer
40 Years of Worry Barometer
50 Looking Back
Analysis 2016
60 What the Swiss Are Worried About 63 A Voice from the Business Community:
Peter Grünenfelder 64 A Voice from the Political Arena:
Jürg Stahl 66 The Essence of Switzerland
Future
69 What Will Preoccupy Us 70 How We Will Work 72 The Last Page:
A Happy and Satisfied Country
Photos:
Helmut Wachter; Peter Langer; niall62/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0
Bulletin 4/2016 — 3
— Stability —
World Stability Map
A glance at the world map shows that stability and prosperity are mutually dependent.
Countries with a high degree of legal certainty, the right of ownership and good governance tend to prosper – regardless of the continent on which they are located.
It ’s also striking that according to the World Bank ’s Political Stability Index, the stable countries of the world tend to be the smaller nations – New Zealand, Liechtenstein, Switzerland, Uruguay, Singapore, Bhutan and Barbados, for example.
The World Bank index is based on data sourced from international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
It considers over twenty indicators ranging from orderly transfers of power following elections through unrest to government stability.
The scale is from 0 (not stable at all) to 100 (extremely stable).
By Daniel Ammann and Nicolas Rapp (map)
World Bank Political Stability Index
CANADA
0= unstable, 100= stable – percentile
In terms of area, Canada is the world ’s second largest country after Russia – and is considered one of the most politically stable.
In the World Bank index, it ranks above the ninetieth percentile:
In other words, over 90 percent of all nations are less stable.
The US, for comparison purposes, ranks slightly below the seventieth percentile.
M E X
I C O
USA
P A C
A R G E N T I N A
I F I C
O C E A N
P E R U
G R E E N L A N D
B R A Z I L
URUGUAY
One of South America ’s smallest countries returned to democracy in 1985, following twelve years of military rule.
Its primary industry is agriculture, mainly livestock.
Uruguay ranks slightly over the eightieth percentile in terms of political stability, similar to Sweden.
A T
L A N
T I C
E A O C
BARBADOS
According to the World Bank index, no country in the Western Hemisphere is more politically stable than the Caribbean island nation.
Not only that, but Barbados, which gained independence from the UK in 1966 and whose economy depends mainly on tourism, also ranks among the top five in the world.
SWITZERLAND
Confirming its reputation as a safe harbor in turbulent times, Switzerland ranks in the world ’s top ten.
The neighboring country of Liechtenstein performs even better.
Five of the ten most stable countries are part of Europe, including Andorra, Luxembourg and Iceland.
4 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
SINGAPORE
A U S T R A L I A I A I N D O N E S M O N G O L I A C H I N A R U S S I A
K A Z A K H S TA N
I R A N S A U D
I A R A B I A
I N D I A
I N D I A
N O
C E A N
BHUTAN
Bhutan is situated in the Himalayas between China and India and is approximately the size of Switzerland.
Within the last ten years, the country has transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarchy.
The most important industries are construction and electric power generation (hydropower).
Ranking near the ninetieth percentile, it is considered to be as politically stable as Norway or Finland.
A T L A N T I C O C E
A L G E R
I A
L I B YA
C H A D
S UDAN
D E M.
R EP.
C ONGO
BOTSWANA
The Southern African country, which gained its independence from the UK 50 years ago, is considered a model for all of Africa.
It is well governed and boasts little corruption and a sound currency.
Rich in diamonds, the country ranks slightly below the ninetieth percentile, higher than most European countries.
A N
The World Bank ’s country classification does not necessarily correspond to the assessment of Credit Suisse.
Source:
World Bank.
http:
// info.
worldbank.
/
Bulletin 4/2016 — 5
— Stability —
“Victories and defeats – both can be difficult”:
Thomas Gottstein.
6 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
“We want to be more Swiss again”
Switzerland ’s stability is an ever more important asset in a turbulent world, says the head of the new Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd. Thomas Gottstein on the art of a successful IPO, the best bank in the country and a night watching television.
By Daniel Ammann and Simon Brunner (interview) and Helmut Wachter (photos)
Mr. Gottstein, we ’re meeting the morning after Stan Wawrinka beat Novak Djokovic in the US Open.
How long did you watch last night?
Truthfully?
I put the kids to bed, and I was only planning to watch the first set.
But I stayed up for the whole thing, and when I looked up at the clock, it was 2:46 am.
A fantastic match.
Wawrinka is a perfect example of Swiss values in the world – just like Roger Federer, but in his own unique way.
Nevertheless, my alarm went off at six this morning, so please bear with me.
You ’re familiar with the world of elite sports; you played golf on the Swiss national team.
What are the most important character traits for success?
Of course, you need talent.
But you ca n’t have long-term success without discipline, even if you are extremely talented.
In sports and life in general, it ’s important to set clear goals.
How did you prepare for an important tournament?
I would go through the course and every single swing in my head the evening before.
Over and over.
I played many rounds mentally.
In every situation, having a clear plan helps to deal with pressure and changing circumstances.
How would you describe yourself as a person?
I ’m basically a positive person.
I like competition.
I enjoy seeing how I measure up to others and winning fair and square.
Or – somewhat less enjoyably – losing gracefully.
Another life lesson that comes from sports is handling victories and defeats.
Both can be difficult.
Clearly, you are exceedingly loyal.
You ’ve worked for CS for 17 years.
I ’ve always been lucky to have had good mentors who believed in me – including Marco Illy, Hans-Ulrich Doerig and James Leigh-Pemberton, just to
Bulletin 4/2016 — 7
— Stability — name three.
I ’ve also always had colleagues whom I could trust and who trusted me.
That inspires loyalty and appreciation, which are very important values to me.
It ’s often said that when money is involved, loyalty is n’t worth much.
What a tired cliché.
In the end, people are everything.
The members of my management team have worked 20 years for Credit Suisse on average.
They know the business, they know what they ’re talking about, and they have years of experience working as a team.
Loyalty and appreciation are very important values to me.
Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd. has just started operating.
There ’s a buzz of excitement around the new company.
I feel it too.
We have founded Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd., and we ’re planning a partial initial public offering next year.
That ’s brought us together as a team.
Plus, with the new Switzerland-based unit we ’ll have someone on the Executive Board who has only one thing in mind when he gets up in the morning and when he goes to bed at night:
Switzerland.
In three sentences, what is your vision for Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd?
I only need one sentence.
We want to be the best bank in Switzerland.
Period.
How will you achieve that?
We want to offer the best service.
We ’re the only bank that can say we concentrate entirely on Switzerland.
The other large banks all still have an offshore business.
In addition, we can combine our focus on Switzerland with Credit Suisse Group ’s global network and full range of services.
That ’s important for our clients – for example, with the takeover of a foreign business by a Swiss company, with a merger that crosses borders, or with alternative investments.
A return to your roots?
Yes, we ’ve renewed our emphasis on Switzerland.
In the last five to ten years, we sometimes invested too little in Switzerland – and in innovations, too.
We ’re now changing this.
Switzerland is our home market – our heart, so to speak.
Switzerland is the most important pillar of the Group ’s earnings, and a stable one, too.
You want to position CS even more strongly as a bank for entrepreneurs.
Other financial institutions want the same.
What will you do differently?
Swiss entrepreneurship is part of our DNA; it ’s been that way since 1856.
Our advantage over most other banks – particularly the purely private banks – is that we ’ve mastered not only the asset management business, but also commercial banking.
We can therefore advise entrepreneurs holistically, as private individuals and as corporate clients.
We ’ve created special desks in all regions to do precisely this.
In the past, we ’ve been governed too strongly by a silo mentality.
In a complex world, we have to be simpler and more pragmatic.
We want to be more Swiss again.
You know this world through personal experience.
Your father was an entrepreneur.
My father owned a company that manufactured coil winding machines, particularly for the electronics industry.
I ’ve experienced what it means to be an entrepreneur – creating jobs, struggling with bureaucracy, keeping a level head in good times and bad, taking on risks and investing in innovations.
You ’ve mentioned that Credit Suisse will also be investing more in innovations.
That includes digitalization, the hot topic of the banking sector.
Precisely because everyone is talking about it, however, it can be hard to see the big picture.
In our view, these are the main points, very briefly stated:
Digitalization ca n’t be stopped.
It is a tremendous opportunity that brings our clients great advantages.
Bank transactions are becoming simpler, there is more transparency, customer experience is better and services are available around the clock.
At the same time, there is more competition; new FinTech firms are springing up everywhere.
We ’re following the model of “frenemies.”
Young upstarts are working together with traditional institutions like ourselves.
Two other things are important with respect to digitalization.
Thanks to modern data analysis – the key concepts here are big data and artificial intelligence – it ’s easier for us to grasp complex processes quickly, recognize patterns in market developments and present them to our clients.
And the automation that accompanies digitalization brings many cost savings.
What does Switzerland mean to you personally – not as a banker, but as a citizen?
Switzerland is my home.
I was born and raised here.
I ’m proud of Switzerland.
The country is a model of economic, political and social success.
Despite our small size, we ’ve been able to maintain our independence and participate actively
8 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
Most observers believe that the asset management business in Switzerland will grow between two and three percent each year.
I ’m convinced that Switzerland will become even more attractive for companies and private clients.
Just think about the growing uncertainty in Europe and around the world.
Think about our political and social stability, the stability of our currency and our attractive tax policy.
Switzerland is attractive and dependable.
That ’s why companies, private banking clients and family offices will continue to come to Switzerland in the future.
Unfortunately, in Switzerland we tend to deny ourselves these advantages.
“We ’re orienting ourselves to Switzerland ’s model of success”:
Gottstein at Credit Suisse headquarters.
within the global community.
As a bank, we ’ve oriented ourselves in many ways to this model of success.
What should Switzerland do or not do, to remain successful in the future?
We have to uphold the favorable conditions of a liberal economic order with moderate state intervention.
Our primary resource is our highly qualified workforce, some of whom we train ourselves and some of whom we have to attract from abroad.
In Switzerland, for example, Credit Suisse has around 17,000 employees, and it offers around 1,350 positions for interns and trainees.
In implementing the referendum against mass immigration, we need to make sure that we remain attractive for highly skilled workers.
In the era after banking secrecy, how do you see Switzerland ’s future as a financial center?
Unfortunately, in Switzerland we ’re tending to deny ourselves these advantages.
Do you mean bank regulation?
Do n’t get me wrong – I think that heightening requirements for banking institutions after the financial crisis were absolutely correct; CS actively supported this.
But now the issue is for Switzerland not to introduce more stringent regulations before everyone else, and not to change these regulations constantly.
There ought to be a few, simple rules that everyone can understand – otherwise, the banks will be less successful in conducting their business, and they will pay fewer taxes and create fewer jobs.
That is n’t what anyone wants.
As an investment banker, you ’ve participated in dozens of IPOs, some as large as for the natural resource company Glencore, worth more than 10 billion Swiss francs.
In general, what are the most important points for a company that wants to go public successfully?
You have to be able to explain your equity story – your argument for issuing new stock – to investors in ten or fifteen minutes.
You have to keep things simple, but be able to go into details when asked.
You have to be able to convince the investors that a good management team is at the helm.
The equity story can be about growth or dividends.
Investors usually want a company to be in the top three of its sector.
And you
Bulletin 4/2016 — 9
— Stability —
Of course, our goal is ambitious, but that ’s how goals should be.
need to be transparent and open about opportunities and risks.
You ’re planning for a partial initial public offering next year with Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd. Unfortunately, we do n’t have time here for a 15-minute answer.
In three minutes, how would you convince us to buy the stock?
You ’re tougher than all the analysts!
So here it is:
We are a rock-solid bank, in one of the wealthiest and most stable countries in the world.
We ’re in the top three of all our business lines, we pay a good dividend, we still have room to grow and our management is excellent.
Those are the five most important points in two sentences.
Why are you even working towards a partial IPO?
There are essentially three reasons.
First, the bank as a whole is currently undervalued.
With the IPO, we can demonstrate the value of the Swiss business.
We ’ll compel investors and analysts to evaluate the individual business areas.
Second, we can raise more capital for the parent company; we ’re counting on 2 to 4 billion Swiss francs.
Third, we ’ve already talked about the positive buzz.
Being able to demonstrate our success as a Swiss team, and seeing this directly in the price of stock, is motivating and bringing us even closer together.
But there is also criticism of the IPO.
It ’s been said that a sheer lack of capital is the reason for going public.
First, the Group is better capitalized today than ever before, having steadily increased its hard-core capital ratio [by 1.8 percentage points between the third quarter of 2015 and the third quarter of 2016, to 12 percent – editor ’s note].
Second, by reinvesting profits CS Switzerland can generate growth capital that is invested exclusively in Switzerland.
Another speculation is that the international part of the business could be sold or merged more profitably after the IPO.
There is n’t a speculation that I have n’t already heard.
That does n’t mean it ’s accurate.
We ’ll continue to be a group with international competency.
That ’s important for our Swiss business, too.
With the capital that you raise by going public, you ’ll have greater financial power.
Is taking over Swiss private banks part of CS Switzerland ’s medium-term strategy?
There are different ways that we might participate in the consolidation of the financial center.
Each year, 10 banks disappear in Switzerland.
Interesting job profiles come onto the market, and we ’re an attractive partner.
We also expect that certain institutions will become external asset managers, which we can support.
And yes, after the initial public offering, acquisitions will be on the table.
By 2018, Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd. wants to bring in a pre-tax income of 2.3 billion Swiss francs.
Is that realistic?
In 2014, we had a pre-tax income of 1.5 billion Swiss francs.
In 2015, it was 1.6 billion.
We earned 930 million in the first six months of 2016 – an increase of eight percent.
And that happened in a very difficult phase – despite Brexit, despite negative interest, despite high organizational costs for the new Swiss legal entity.
We are on the right track.
Some competitors think your growth targets in the home market are much too ambitious.
Of course, our goal is ambitious, but that ’s how goals should be.
The plan is for us to grow by two percent and reduce costs by three percent.
My first observation is that we are on the right track.
Second, I find it striking that our competitors are commenting on our business plan at all.
I would never do this.
In my interpretation, they ’re getting nervous.
One final speculation.
Who will merge together first – FCZ and GC (Zurich ’s top soccer clubs), or CS and UBS?
Both are highly improbable, although the first would make more sense, as long as the new club is called FCZ (laughs).
Thomas P. Gottstein, 52, is CEO of Credit Suisse (Switzerland) Ltd. He has held various positions at the bank over the past 17 years, including Head of Premium Clients Switzerland, Head of Investment Banking Switzerland and Co-Head of Equity Capital Markets EMEA.
Originally from Rüschlikon near Zurich, Gottstein holds a doctorate in finance and accounting from the University of Zurich.
He lives in the Zurich area with his wife and two children.
The interview was conducted on September 12, 2016.
10 — Bulletin 4/2016
Our Commitment to Lower Youth Unemployment.
Through the initiative to tackle youth unemployment, Credit Suisse has been committed to improving the opportunities for career starters in Switzerland since 2010.
More than 8,800 young adults have already received assistance from our partner organizations and from the bank.
Since April 1, 2015, these services have been supported by the legally autonomous “Check Your Chance” association and managed sustainably by the partner organizations.
credit-suisse.
com/youthunemployment
— Stability —
Refuge of Stability:
Swiss National Bank at Berne ’s Bundesplatz.
Wanted:
Anchors
The Swiss National Bank has seen its greatest success at times when it was able to peg the Swiss franc to the currency of its major trade partners.
Implementing an independent monetary policy was much more difficult.
Switzerland must therefore hope for the survival of the euro.
By Oliver Adler and Maxime Botteron
12 — Bulletin 4/2016 Photo:
Peter Klauzner/Keystone
— Stability —
The Swiss franc is the strongest currency in the world.
Since the transition to flexible exchange rates was accomplished in 1973, the purchasing power of the Swiss franc has “only” declined by a mere 60 percent, while that of the US dollar has fallen by almost 85 percent and that of the British pound by more than 90 percent.
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) and its policy of maintaining currency value are mainly to thank for this trend, followed by the Swiss export sector ’s above-average gains in competitiveness.
Not least, the strong Swiss franc is the result of the national bank ’s political independence.
Throughout the years, the SNB has been able to fend off attempts to pressure it into utilizing its monetary monopoly for special interests, whether funding for cantons or protections for industries with weak infrastructures.
There is no doubt that this independence usually made its job easier.
Time and time again, though, the SNB has found itself facing major challenges related to monetary policy, even today.
These challenges are triggered by the instability of the world, something it is impossible for Switzerland to avoid.
This small economy has exposed itself to international capital flows with practically no barriers, ultimately because this is a key element of international asset management.
For this reason, it finds itself potentially facing significant fluctuations in the value of its currency, fluctuations which could trigger massive disruptions within its economy.
This first anchor was soon lost, however.
At the onset of the First World War, the SNB was forced to break from the gold standard along with the leading national economies.
And yet in 1924 – 25, it was one of the first central banks to reintroduce parity with gold.
Despite the global economic crisis, it was one of the last to devalue its currency against gold in 1936.
In retrospect, it seems that gold was a poor choice of anchor.
It is true that this focus on – or rather, obsession with – gold made it possible to quell inflation rapidly following the First World War, but in the
Naturally, it is impossible for Switzerland to avoid the instability of the world.
1930s, this highly restrictive monetary policy set off a deep recession, until the Swiss franc ’s devaluation in 1936.
Especially in Europe, the strong growth was doubtlessly attributable primarily to the effects of the post-war recovery, substantial population growth and rapid technological advances.
But linking the leading currencies strongly to the US dollar and the resulting monetary stability also contributed significantly to the boom.
The Bretton Woods System collapsed in the early 1970s because, in order to finance the Vietnam War and their burgeoning social programs, the US had implemented an increasingly inflationary eco nomic policy and had lost gold reserves.
An era of flexible exchange rates followed, bringing a powerful boost in appreciation to the Swiss franc.
The SNB felt obligated to implement an independent monetary policy during the subsequent “unanchored” period.
Turbulent Decades In order to minimize these fluctuations and to ensure economic stability, the SNB has sought monetary anchors many times over the course of its history.
This was the case even in those early years after it was founded in 1906.
At that time, the SNB focused its policies on stabilizing the franc by participating in the international gold standard.
A bit of background:
In the decades following its introduction in 1850, the Swiss franc was one of the weaker currencies compared to the major currencies such as the British pound or the French franc.
7% 3% 0
1949 – 73 (Bretton Woods)
1974 – 89 (unanchored)
Growth and Inflation
Economic growth during periods with a de facto or actual peg of the Swiss franc.
Switzerland US Germany Inflation 1990 – 2007 (false anchor) 2008 – 2015 (financial/euro crisis)
Source:
IMF, Credit Suisse
Bulletin 4/2016 — 13
— Stability —
Among other things, the national bank experimented with a variety of money supply targets during this time.
Measured according to the mix of growth and inflation, the results were varied.
In the period from 1974 to 1990, for instance, economic growth was significantly slower than in Germany, and inflation was almost the same or just slightly lower, as was the case in other comparative periods.
Compared to the US, growth was also noticeably slower, but inflation was lower, too.
Upward Pressure on the Franc The unanchored condition persisted throughout the 1980s and early 1990s
After the euro was physically launched in 2001, Switzerland finally enjoyed a distinct reprieve on its currency front.
The new anchor – apparently – grew stronger.
For this reason, among others, this period was characterized by robust growth in Switzerland.
The second growth driver was increasing immigration to Switzerland after the bilateral agreements had taken effect.
Unlike other European countries, the SNB never considered formally pegging its currency to the euro.
External stability seemed to be sufficient to provide stability to its own currency and economy.
The global financial crisis and the euro crisis that followed dealt a severe blow to hopes for external stability.
Above all, the European Central Bank (ECB), in contrast to the SNB and the US Federal Reserve Bank, lacks the tools and the political legitimacy to push any rapid restructuring measures through the fragile banking system.
The costs of failure were and still remain high.
As in past crises, the
Bretton Woods conference, 1944.
Swiss franc came under intense pressure to revalue because, in monetary terms, Switzerland was considered a safe harbor.
Attempts to withstand this pressure by implementing foreign exchange interventions and then an exchange rate floor (in other words, dropping an emergency anchor) failed.
The shock from currency revaluation severely affected the export industry.
Thanks to the highly robust condition of
The SNB embraced the monetary policy of the ECB.
the domestic markets bolstered by high levels of immigration and extremely low interest rates, the recessionary effects on the Swiss national economy were even milder than those experienced after the collapse of Bretton Woods.
Since the abandonment of the euro floor and the subsequent major exchange rate adjustments, the currency front has been relatively calm.
For several months now, the euro/franc exchange rate has remained within a narrow corridor.
Yet this is only because the SNB has lowered interest rates into the negative realm and, since that time, the exchange rate has been shored up by interventions on the foreign exchange markets.
As a result, the SNB ’s total assets are trending parallel to those of the ECB.
The SNB has embraced the ECB ’s monetary policy on a de facto basis and continues to peg itself to the euro, if less strictly than before.
Once again, it demonstrates that in order to preserve stability the SNB has repeatedly tried to rely on external anchors, even when the outlook for this anchor currency remains unclear.
If the economic situation mainly in the euro zone ’s southern countries continues to improve and policymakers to do not turn their backs on the euro, Switzerland stands to gain a great deal from this stabilization.
In contrast, a breakup of the euro would represent another major challenge for Switzerland and its central bank.
Oliver Adler is Head of Economic Research and Maxime Botteron is Senior Economist at Credit Suisse.
14 — Bulletin 4/2016
Photo:
Hulton Archive/Getty Images
— Stability —
Instability:
Yes, but …
Political and economic uncertainty is less of a concern than one would assume.
By Lukas Gehrig
A stable economic environment benefits lending, investment and consumption.
Stability, however, is not so easily quantified and depends heavily on how it is measured or subjectively perceived.
The Global Economic Policy Uncertainty index represents an objective measure for assessing stability.
To create this index, a group of economists counts the number of articles published each month in a country ’s major media outlets where the terms “uncertainty”/“uncertain” and “economic”/“economy” appear in combination with at least one term from a political context, such as “initiative,” “congress,” “parliament” or “national bank.”
Using this same logic, Credit Suisse has prepared an economic policy uncertainty index for the German- and French-speaking media in Switzerland (see upper chart).
Two things can be observed here.
First, the number of reports on economic policy uncertainty published each month has increased drastically over the last five years.
Second, political events triggering uncertainty have occurred almost every year since 2011.
The last three major events of this type, namely the approval of the Mass Immigration Initiative (MEI), the Swiss National Bank ’s removal of the exchange rate floor and the Brexit referendum in the UK, served to unleash veritable floods of articles addressing uncertainty and the Swiss economy.
Uncertain Repercussions Sentiment among financial analysts, consumers and companies reflects these uncertainties.
The lower chart shows the forecast for Switzerland ’s economy in the short term as seen by financial analysts.
As the chart makes clear, confidence was weighed down considerably by the adoption of MEI.
It was unclear just how the initiative would be implemented when it was approved.
Significantly More Reports
Number of newspaper articles on economic policy uncertainty
Fluctuations in Mood on the Market
Sentiment indicators, standardized values
Uncertainty index
Financial market alignment Business climate Consumer sentiment on the economy
Source:
policyuncertainty.
com, Factiva, ZEW, KOF, SECO, Credit Suisse
The mood among companies is also affected by events with no direct connection to the Swiss economy or ones with largely ambiguous impacts on the Swiss economy.
This is evidenced by the peak in the KOF Business Situation Indicator prepared by the Swiss Institute for Business Cycle Research in Zurich following the Brexit vote in the UK.
The lower chart also depicts private households’expectations for the future.
These expectations are collected only quarterly in the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) consumer sentiment survey, yet this is not the sole reason for the smaller fluctuations in confidence.
Consumer mood is simply rooted less in the assessment of a future economic situation than in personal job security.
We can see that uncertainty in an economic policy context heavily influences the mood in boardrooms and in the markets.
The actual effects of major uncertainty, however, can only be seen in the financial markets.
The Brexit decision, for instance, caused a temporary drop in Swiss stock prices.
In the case of many decisions affecting real economic situations, other effects are the more significant ones.
One example is corporate investment.
Despite major uncertainty in relation to the implementation of MEI, there was no collapse in investment.
Similarly, despite the gloomy mood, households did not forego making major purchases in 2015, even buying more cars thanks to the strong Swiss franc.
In summary, when it comes to the economy, hard facts are still more important than “perceived uncertainty.”
Lukas Gehrig is a research analyst in Swiss Macroeconomic Research at Credit Suisse.
Bulletin 4/2016 — 15
1.
Carbon fibers Carbon fibers are extraordinarily strong and rigid.
What we make out of them is listed on page 23.
— Stability —
Eternal Values
A picture puzzle of industrial manufacturing.
The highly sturdy materials on these pages are characterized by extraordinary properties.
By Pierangelo Gröning (selection) and Peter Langer (photo)
Bulletin 4/2016 — 17
— Stability —
2.
Ceramic Not the material used to make clay pots – we mean high-performance ceramic.
18 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
Bulletin 4/2016 — 19
— Stability —
4.
Titanium It is lightweight and strong, making it ideal for moving high mass objects, such as in aviation and aerospace applications.
20 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
5.
Graphite After diamonds, the second-hardest natural form of carbon:
an excellent conductor of electricity and extremely heat-resistant.
Bulletin 4/2016 — 21
— Stability —
6.
Graphene Graphene is the molecular sibling of graphite and reveals the limits of what is physically possible.
22 — Bulletin 4/2016 Microscopic image:
Izzat Suffian, Houmam Kafa, Noelia Rubio, Belén Ballesteros and Khuloud T. Al- Jamal/Wellcome Images
— Stability —
Hard Stuff
Lighter, faster, stronger:
Cutting-edge materials and composites make it possible to build machines and structures that last longer and have improved performance.
However, the world ’s hardest material is millions of years old.
1.
Carbon fibers Properties:
Carbon fiber composites (CFC) possess a high degree of mechanical stability at a very low density (weight).
A carbon fiber is ten times thinner than a human hair.
Use:
aircraft, engine components, automobiles, bicycles, yachts, tow ropes.
Utility poles sheathed in CFC weigh approximately half as much as steel poles and are easier to erect.
2.
Ceramics Properties:
Silicon carbide (SiC) and silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4) are high-performance ceramics that exhibit little mechanical wear, even at high temperatures.
Moreover, the material is lightweight and scarcely expands when exposed to heat.
Use:
brake pads and discs in (sports) cars, cutting tools, silicon carbide for highperformance transistors and mirrors in telescopes like the “Gregor,” which is being used on the island of Tenerife to study the sun ’s structures.
350 Zeichen
350 Zeichen
4.
Titanium Properties:
Titanium is very lightweight as well as extremely strong and stable.
It is used everywhere that high-mass objects need to be moved.
Titanium has a natural protective TiO 2 coating, which prevents corrosion (rust).
TiO 2 is biocompatible, which enables titanium to be used for implants (splints, screws, etc.).
Use:
in automotive, aircraft and ship construction, as well as in the production of golf club heads, clock housings and steam turbines.
5.
Graphite Properties:
As one of the softest materials, carbon in the form of graphite can be considered the opposite of the diamond.
Graphite is an excellent conductor of electricity.
And graphite also remains stable when exposed to high heat, up to far above 1000 degrees depending on the application.
Use:
as a coating in ovens, as filler material to improve mechanical or electrical properties.
6.
Graphene Properties:
Graphene is the “molecular” sibling of graphite – just one atomic layer thicker.
Its thermal and electrical conductivity and mechanical stability are unique, and it has a wide range of applications.
Apart from its use in electronic components, graphene is always used in small amounts as an additive (filler) to improve the properties of the base material.
Small amount, big effect.
The discovery of graphene was recognized in 2010 with the Nobel Prize in Physics.
Use:
As a filler, graphene improves the already excellent properties of carbon fiber composite materials (e.
g.
, tennis rackets).
Due to its unique electronic properties, graphene will also be used in electronic components in the future.
Pierangelo Gröning joined Empa, the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, in 2003.
In 2006, the physicist and electrical engineer was appointed to the Board of Directors and became head of the Modern Materials and Surfaces department as well as head of the Nanostructured Materials research focus area.
Photos:
Adrian Lyon/Alamy; Marka/Alamy; Pavel Filatov/Alamy; Custom Medical Stock Photo/Science Photo Library/Keystone; MUT Advanced Heating, Jena; Head Sport GmbH; Private archive
Bulletin 4/2016 — 23
— Stability —
“Solidarity does n’t depend on prosperity”
Annemarie Huber-Hotz, president of the Swiss Red Cross (SRK), talks about the 150-year history of this humanitarian organization, refugees and the importance of humanity in an unstable world.
By Simon Brunner and Michael Krobath
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement has over 80 million members and more than 17 million volunteers worldwide.
What do these people have in common?
All of them are committed to the same ethical principles and to international humanitarian law.
It is impressive to see them following the example of Henry Dunant and the motto “Tutti fratelli” [“All are brothers”] as they dedicate themselves to protecting the lives and dignity of every human being.
Altogether, 72,000 volunteers work for the SRK.
The Swiss Federal Statistical Office has reported a decline in “informal volunteer work”; while 23.2 percent of the Swiss population were volunteers in 2000, that share has since dropped to 18.6 percent.
Have you noticed a difference?
Yes, it ’s noticeable in certain service areas – fewer volunteers are working with the elderly, for example – but particularly when it comes to time-intensive or longer-term assignments.
However, people are still eager to volunteer for some kinds of work, such as providing support for refugees.
Corporate volunteering programs like that of Credit Suisse [see box] are able to offset some of the drop in the number of volunteers, and that is cause for optimism.
People often say that the younger generation is preoccupied with its own concerns.
Are you finding it increasingly difficult to recruit younger volunteers?
No, we ’re seeing growing numbers of very active young people.
But volunteer organizations like the Swiss Red Cross need to provide the right conditions for volunteers – to appreciate them, and
The face of poverty and need has changed over the past 150 years.
to involve them in developing and implementing new ideas.
They need opportunities for training, for taking responsibility and for working in teams.
They also need support.
The SRK is celebrating its 150th birthday in 2016.
How has the organization changed over the years?
Nothing has changed in its fundamental values and commitment to helping those in need, no matter who they are.
But we have adjusted to changing times by introducing new kinds of services in the areas of health care, social services, integration and rescue operations.
The face of poverty and need has changed over the past 150 years.
Today our efforts focus on the disadvantaged, the lonely and those in precarious health, as well as their families.
But we also work with families, children and adolescents, asylum seekers, refugees and the undocumented.
Initiatives in foreign countries have taken on a more prominent role – why is that?
Mainly because many countries struggle with poverty and poor health care.
There are enormous needs.
It is also because of cooperation within the Red
24 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability — one another.
Even in difficult economic times, the Swiss people have always been very supportive of the SRK.
The number of relief organizations in Switzerland has grown over the past 50 years.
How has this changed the work of the SRK?
You ’re right, there are now relief organizations and charitable foundations for every conceivable purpose, and fundraising is a particular problem.
The more stable the country, the better it is for a national Red Cross organization.
I believe, however, that there is room for all of us and that by working together in an intelligent way, we will be able to achieve our goals.
Profile Annemarie Huber-Hotz, 68, has been president of the Swiss Red Cross (SRK) since 2011.
She is a member of the FDP and served as federal chancellor of Switzerland from 2000 to 2007, the first woman to hold that office.
She is married and has three children.
Pictured:
SRK President Huber-Hotz with Syrian refugee children in Lebanon in 2015.
Cross and Red Crescent movement, as well as our solidarity with sister organizations in developing countries.
How important are Switzerland ’s stability and neutrality for SRK ’s success?
Both are important for Switzerland.
The more stable the country, the better it is for a national Red Cross organization.
For the SRK, however, the most important factor is the generosity of the Swiss people, and the solidarity they show toward people who need help.
In your speech marking the 150th anniversary of the Swiss Red Cross, you quoted the English poet William Blake to the effect that we are all doomed until humanity awakens within us.
What did you mean by that?
Everyone needs community and a humane environment.
But we also need to do our part – beyond what the law requires.
Through our involvement, we experience the happiness, satisfaction and meaning that can be derived from showing compassion for others.
Is it easier to be compassionate in times of prosperity?
Would an economic crisis make us less willing to show solidarity?
No, not at all.
Solidarity depends not on prosperity, but on a society ’s culture and a recognition that we all need to help
The SRK is supported by private individuals and foundations as well as cantons and communities.
What role does cooperation with companies play?
We have to work together to address social challenges.
Accordingly, we attach great importance to partnering with the business community – not just because of the financial support companies provide, but also because of the opportunities they offer for knowledge sharing and the commitment of their employees.
We are grateful to be able to engage in such fruitful cooperation.
Together we can do more!
You also have contact with politicians.
Given the tense international situation, have you experienced more attempts to exert political influence?
Independence and neutrality are essential if the work of the Red Cross is to be accepted by all parties, even when we are engaged in very delicate missions.
Only then will we be able to fulfill our humanitarian role of aiding the world ’s most vulnerable people.
That
Photo:
© SRK, Remo Nägeli Bulletin 4/2016 — 25
— Stability — system.
Given demographic change, will care for the elderly be a future focus of the SRK ’s efforts?
Providing support for older people and the family members who care for them will remain one of our focus areas.
But we will also be devoting more attention to families and the ill, as well as to the integration of those on the fringes of society.
Swiss Red Cross
The Swiss Red Cross (SRK) is Switzerland ’s largest and oldest humanitarian organization.
Founded in 1866, it has worked in Switzerland and abroad to help people in need for the past 150 years.
Its efforts focus on health care, rescue operations and the integration of society ’s weakest members:
the elderly, the disabled, the needy, families and migrants.
Pictured:
Thousands of volunteers and members of the SRK gather on the Bundesplatz in Switzerland ’s capital city of Berne to celebrate the 150th birthday of the Red Cross (April 2, 2016).
It was once your dream to become Secretary General of the United Nations.
What are your dreams today?
I was n’t serious!
Today I dream of a more just world in which more people have the resources and opportunities they need to live a life in dignity.
To that end, we need more solidarity, respect and willingness to compromise in the political arena – even in Switzerland.
also holds true for our work in Switzerland, for example helping refugees and the undocumented.
The government and administrative authorities respect that.
From the perspective of the SRK, is the world more or less safe than it was 20 years ago?
Worldwide, conflicts have declined – with the exception of the past two or three years.
The media, however, create the
Worldwide, conflicts have declined – with the exception of the past two or three years.
impression that violence is everywhere.
This causes anxiety for many people, and it plays into the hands of nationalist parties that are trying to convince us that we are under constant threat and exploiting fears for their own ends.
More people are fleeing their homelands than at any time since World War II.
Is this the greatest challenge the SRK has ever faced?
The SRK has always come to the aid of refugees.
But the fact that refugees are now arriving from other cultures represents a new challenge.
Another new element is that the SRK is now aiding refugees in other countries, for example Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
Can you understand the anxiety many people in Switzerland feel about the flow of refugees?
They are worried about losing their own culture.
They fear the economic consequences of integration and are concerned about a threat to the welfare state.
Yes, I understand their anxiety.
They will be less fearful if they get to know refugees and their reasons for fleeing their homelands.
I should also note that Switzerland has a good, albeit strict, asylum policy.
The people who are seeking asylum, a small fraction relative to the size of the Swiss population, do not really pose a threat to our culture or our welfare state.
The SRK was very much involved in the establishment of the Swiss health care Credit Suisse supports the Swiss Red Cross (SRK)
The SRK is Credit Suisse ’s most important strategic partner for the bank ’s charitable work in Switzerland.
Credit Suisse provides financial support and expertise to the SRK through a variety of corporate citizenship initiatives.
In addition, under the company ’s corporate volunteering program, employees participate in blood drives, the “2 × Christmas” campaign to collect gifts for the needy, the SRK car service, exercises conducted by the Swiss Disaster Dog Association (REDOG) and the integration project “Mittten unter uns” (In Our Midst).
Credit Suisse allows employees to take up to four days off per year to participate in its corporate volunteering program, encouraging them to give back to society and to further their own personal and professional development.
Some 2,000 employees volunteer with the SRK each year.
In addition, the Swiss clients and employees of Credit Suisse have the option of making so-called micro-donations by rounding up amounts charged on their credit or Maestro cards to a specified level and donating the difference, or by donating interest earned on their accounts.
Those donations go to selected partner organizations, one of which is the SRK.
26 — Bulletin 4/2016 Photo:
© SRK, André Albrecht
Subscribe to Bulletin …
…
or order other Credit Suisse publications free of charge at www.credit-suisse.com/shop (publications shop).
Electronic newsletters on current topics related to business, society, culture, and sports are available for subscription at www.credit-suisse.com/newsletter.
— Stability —
Till the End of Time …
What scientists have learned about the recipe for lasting love.
1 — Being There for Each Other – Especially in Good Times
What happens when your partner comes home with good news?
According to a study by psychologists at the University of California, Santa Barbara, an “active-constructive” response to such news significantly improves a couple ’s perceptions of the quality of their relationship.
So what does this mean?
Celebrate the good times!
In fact, the study suggests that an active-constructive response to good news has a much greater impact on the quality of
Compiled by Christian Heinrich and Friederike Hantel (illustration) the relationship than active-constructive sympathy in response to bad news and unhappy events.
2 — 2 +2= 5 Couples who are friends with one or more other couples and engage in regular activities with them have happier relationships or marriages than couples without close friendships.
This was the conclusion reached by social psychologists Geoffrey Greif and Kathleen Holtz Deal after conducting extensive interviews with 123 couples for their book “Two Plus Two:
Couples and Their Couple Friendships.”
3 — A Formula for Stability Five to one:
This is the formula for a stable marriage that psychologist John Gottman arrived at after 40 years of award-winning research.
What it means is this:
A relationship is stable when the partners engage in five times as many positive as negative interactions.
4 — High Expectations There is a common belief that we should n’t expect too much of marriage, since we ’re bound to be disappointed.
But in his 20 years of providing talk therapy for couples, American therapist Lee Baucom found that people with high standards and ideals who expect to get along well with their partners and to experience romance and passion in their marriages are more likely to have their expectations fulfilled, relative to people who content themselves with a “secondclass” relationship.
5 — Happiness Is Found within Ourselves Whether it ’s getting married, winning the lottery or rising to the top of a company ’s hierarchy – all of these things can be wonderful for a time, but people ’s satisfaction with
28 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability — their lives usually returns to its original level within a few months, as numerous studies have shown.
The potential for happiness ultimately lies within each of us – so it ’s unfair to expect our partners to make us happier over the long term, writes New York Times journalist Tara Parker-Pope in her book “For Better:
How the Surprising Science of Happy Couples Can Help Your Marriage Succeed.”
6 — More Novelty, More Excitement Researchers at Stony Brook University divided 53 married couples into three groups.
One was told to spend 90 minutes per week together doing something relaxing (having dinner, going to a movie); the second group was told to try something exciting and new that they would n’t ordinarily have done (sports, dancing); the third group received no specific instructions.
After 10 weeks, the couples in the “new and exciting” group reported a much greater increase in satisfaction with their marriages than the two other groups.
7 — Expanding Your Social Horizons To study relationship stability, computer scientist and researcher Jon Kleinberg of Cornell University analyzed data from 1.3 million Facebook users.
When users indicated that they were in a relationship with a specific individual, he was able to determine the duration of the relationship.
Just having a lot of friends in common was not enough to sustain a fairly stable relationship.
Something else was striking about those who stayed together longer than average:
Their friends were relatively unlikely to be friends with one another.
This suggests that these couples were members of many different social groups, and that they had their own separate groups of friends to introduce to one another.
8 — The Importance of Sex Nearly every study of sex and relationships has reached the same conclusion:
Sex is essential to satisfaction in a marriage.
Couples who have sex once a week are particularly satisfied with their relationships, according to a study of 25,000 people published in the journal Social Psychological and Personality Science in 2015 – and this holds true regardless of age and the duration of the marriage.
The study notes while that more frequent sex is by no means a bad thing (approximately 30 percent of couples have sex two or three times a week), many studies have shown that greater frequency does not significantly increase satisfaction.
9 — The Age-Old Topic of Money Arguments about money are closely correlated with a subsequent separation, says Sonya Britt of Kansas State University.
The solution?
Financial harmony – which means knowing and respecting your partner ’s views and attitudes about money and spending.
That, in turn, assumes that you talk to each other often – including about money.
10 — Children:
Neither a Solution nor a Problem Studies have shown for years that having children initially reduces the perceived quality of a marriage.
That does n’t mean that they pose a threat to the stability of a relationship, however; indeed, couples with children are less likely to divorce.
Studies at the University of Nebraska have found that couples with children continue to be just as happy with their partners.
Christian Heinrich is a medical doctor and works as a freelance journalist Christian
.
He is a Heinrich regular contributor ist promovierter to Arzt Die Zeit newspaper und and Geo freier magazine Journalist.
.
Er schreibt regelmässig für «Zeit» und «Geo».
Bulletin 4/2016 — 29
Dr. Rafie Ghaffarzadegan lost his brother because of a fatwa in Iran:
“My goal was to keep my brother ’s memory alive by refusing to be silent.”
30 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
The Astonishing Power of the Soul
Why do some people survive and overcome events that shatter others?
The phenomenon of resilience, our psychological ability to endure and bounce back.
By Beatrice Schlag (author) and Christian Grund (photos)
Bulletin 4/2016 — 31
— Stability — eter Hogenkamp never once thought the word “crash” when the Crossair plane began to lurch shortly before it was supposed to land in Zurich – and when after shaking violently for several seconds, it slammed into a snowy wooded area.
He did not see the flames in the rows ahead of him that the woman seated next to him, Jacqueline Badran, who was his business partner at the time and would later become a member of the Swiss National Council, most certainly noticed.
He first realized that the plane was completely on its side on the ground when he unfastened his seatbelt and fell through the air across the aisle, smashing into the window on the other side.
Badran fell on top of him seconds later.
They climbed out through the back of the plane, which had been torn off, and stumbled through the snow away from the aircraft as quickly as possible.
The first clear thought Hogenkamp remembers having is that airplanes can explode.
And in fact, they heard several detonations shortly afterward.
“People are dying right now,” said Badran in horror.
That was when Hogenkamp slowly began to realize what had happened.
“Before that I would not have been surprised if all of the passengers had met up in the woods unscathed.
The word’crash’only popped into my mind when I called my parents.”
Of the 33 passengers and crew who were on board flight 3597 on November 24, 2001, only the nine people who had been in the rear of the plane at the time of the crash survived.
Before taking off in Berlin, Hogenkamp and Badran had switched to seats in the back because they were tired and the people around them were noisy.
Two people in the row directly in front of their original assigned seats survived with very serious injuries, but no one in front of that.
Three days later, Peter Hogenkamp and Jacqueline Badran were back in the office.
“It still had n’t hit me hard yet, the way I expected it to,” says Hogenkamp fifteen years later.
He does though experience a certain fear of flying to this day.
Since everyone warned him about possible consequences like nightmares, anxiety or panic attacks, he and Badran sought out a psychologist six months after the crash.
“He said that we had instinctively done everything right to avoid a trauma.
We left the site of the accident immediately and did n’t look back at what was happening there.
When a seriously injured man whose burned skin hung in tatters from his hands came to the place where we had met the police and first responders, we got up and left.
And then we returned to our normal everyday lives right away.”
Hogenkamp knows another surviving passenger who took sick leave immediately and still suffered from anxiety months later.
The only surviving flight attendant gave up flying right after the crash.
One businessman said he would fly again as soon as possible, otherwise he would have to change jobs.
Other than
“The word ‘ crash’only popped into my mind when I called my parents.”
that, he refused to talk about the accident.
“I had the impression he wanted to completely block out what had happened,” says Hogenkamp.
“Jacqueline and I did n’t do that.
We talked with victims’family members, gave interviews, and talked about it to each other and our friends a great deal.
That helped me.”
However, looking back he thinks it was even more crucial “that I was n’t injured and never feared for my life, or at least not that I can remember.
That was a gift.”
Moreover, he is convinced that his feeling of being needed at the newly founded company and that he owed it to his colleagues and customers to do his work was part of the reason that the emotional “hammer” never hit him as hard as he expected.
Can Survival Be Learned?
Resilience research supports his conclusions.
What researchers call “self-efficacy,” a feeling of competence and the ability to meet life ’s challenges, is a personality characteristic found in resilient people.
However, resilience research is only a few decades old and the term “resilience” is being expanded significantly.
Initially people, especially children, were only called resilient if they remained psychologically unaffected despite poverty, severe illness, natural disasters or wartime catastrophes.
These days the attribute of resilience is being applied to organizational structures, ecological systems and people who confidently master challenges posed by the professional world despite stress.
There are offerings available for building emotional resilience and resilience training for managers.
According to their ads, resilience can be learned.
Dr. Matthis Schick, Chief Resident at the outpatient clinic for victims of torture and war at Zurich University Hospital ’s Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, doubts that people can build resilience through training:
“I believe that you can make organizations less susceptible to disruptions from outside attacks through a healthy corporate environment, through respect.
But to claim that a person who was not resilient before will be resilient after a dozen sessions?
I consider that unrealistic.
At any rate, there is far too little
32 — Bulletin 4/2016
Peter Hogenkamp was in a plane crash:
“The emotional ‘ hammer’that I was expecting never came.”
Bulletin 4/2016 — 33
Simona Caldarelli survived a tumor removal operation with severe complications:
“I understand crises.”
34 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability — research data to support that conclusion.”
Anyway, he sees resilience – much like trauma – more like a model of a scale that can tip to one side or the other.
“Tragic events are followed by negative factors as well as protective ones.
When the negative factors weigh heavier, a trauma results.
If the protective factors outweigh them, resilience.
That is very simple as a metaphor and very complex in reality, because so many different things play a role:
genes, epigenetics, experience, upbringing, environment, current life situation.”
One thing is certain:
Stress is one of the greatest risk factors for developing posttraumatic stress disorders, regardless of whether at home or at work.
Stress diminishes coping resources.
After a traumatic experience, social embeddedness is key – family and friends who make a person feel secure.
When one of Simona Caldarelli ’s eyes began to wander, her mother Sylvia was alarmed:
A healthy two-year-old does not simply turn cross-eyed suddenly!
The eye doctor prescribed glasses and attempted to soothe her fears, saying:
“Only one in 100,000 children with a lazy eye has a brain tumor.”
The mother insisted on an MRI, which revealed a tumor between the cerebrum and cerebellum.
Simona was rushed to the children ’s hospital and admitted.
“What happens if we do n’t operate?”
her mother asked the surgeon.
“Then your daughter will be dead in five weeks,” he answered.
The operation lasted eight hours.
When Silvia Caldarelli saw her child again, Simona could neither move nor speak.
The right half of her face was completely distorted.
That would subside, the doctors said, but the right side of her face would be paralyzed because they had had to cut the nerve during the operation.
Despite successfully removing the malignant tumor, doctors predicted the young girl would survive for only a few months.
The two-year-old started chemotherapy a week after surgery.
“It was pure torture,” said her mother, “all my child could do was whimper.”
During that time, Silvia Caldarelli was at the hospital almost every day to give her daughter a feeling of familiar normalcy.
Today the 26-year-old home care nurse and medic cannot remember any of that.
She only knows from being told how often her mother was with her.
But she says without hesitation:
“You have to depend on a reliable environment.”
After finishing chemotherapy, the then fourand-a-half-year-old girl immediately started public kindergarten.
Chemotherapy had made her hard of hearing, and she had major difficulties with balance and concentration.
The facial paralysis made articulation more difficult for her.
After a year of speech therapy kindergarten, she started elementary school.
Did she feel different than the other kids?
“Not at first.
I did n’t get teased about my face until I changed schools.”
Other surgeries followed soon after she was released from the hospital.
One operation on her lower abdomen after a fall.
Eye surgery to make her lazy eye less severe.
As a teenager, she underwent three painful and largely unsuccessful facial operations to improve the paralysis and reactivate the left facial nerve.
“Nevertheless,” she says, “I can whistle again and eat and drink better.
But sometimes I was very miserable.”
She lost a huge amount of weight at 18, and doctors diagnosed her
“I often see healthy people and think they have far less energy than I have.”
with type 1 diabetes.
She took the news almost calmly:
“I was relieved it was n’t anorexia.”
Her body had gotten accustomed to having to work harder than other people and explore things more intensively.
Having to give herself insulin shots, she says, improved her coordination and her attention to healthy nutrition.
The only thing her friends sometimes find fault with is her lack of patience when other people complain.
The self-confident young woman who says that she has “the best life” does not grumble about the fact that she was the one in 100,000.
The cancer did not return, as follow-up exams have shown.
When someone asks why her face looks the way it does, “I actually like to tell them what happened to me,” she says, “because it helps me influence a great deal at work, too.
I know many things firsthand that other caregivers only know about in theory.
I understand crises.”
She was not familiar with the term resilience, but nodded immediately when she heard about it.
Like many young victims of serious accidents or illnesses, she is convinced that such a fate only happens to born fighters who are strong enough to overcome such a radical limitation in their lives.
“I do n’t think my sister would have survived it.
I often see healthy people and think they have far less energy than I have.
Maybe it ’s because I can handle a lot of commonplace things.
Or maybe I ’m just someone who can deal with a lot.”
She thinks not talking about her cancer would be wrong:
“You ca n’t just lock away the topic for yourself, it ca n’t be shut off.
You can suppress it, but I ’m convinced that it will come back as a disorder later.”
The Ability to Get Back Up Again
Research confirms Simona ’s speculations.
Resilience is decisively different from the ability to simply push away tragedy.
“Suppression and avoidance are coping mechanisms that are inherent in all of us,” says psychiatrist Matthis Schick.
“There is nothing wrong with using them if they work.
People attempt to avoid things that trigger memories in order to protect themselves.
But it comes at a price.
Nothing gets processed and nothing changes
Bulletin 4/2016 — 35
— Stability —
Dr. Matthis Schick has been Chief Resident at the outpatient clinic for victims of torture and war at Zurich University Hospital ’s Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy since 2010.
He specializes in the traumas of refugees and victims of torture, and conducts research on the topic of neurobiological aspects of disorders resulting from trauma.
inside.”
Stress or professional difficulties can bring the repressed suffering to the surface in a completely different manifestation, such as sleep disorders or relationship problems.
Germany ’s rubble women, whose work to clear away the remains of bombedout buildings after World War II was taken as a symbol of resilience after traumatic events, developed symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorders in old age at a disproportionate rate.
Once they were no longer needed, the past caught up with them.
Modern researchers know that resilience is not necessarily a lifelong force – it can decline with age.
When children leave home, friends die, the body gets weaker and people are thrown back on themselves, the ability to counter stressful experiences with positive perspectives seems to decline.
Schick notes that with war refugees, they often manage quite well in the beginning and find their way in the new, safe country.
“They have escaped and they manage to bounce back.
Then at 50 they have a little accident on the construction site, get back pain, are put on sick leave, lose their job.
Then the house of cards comes falling down, and people develop posttraumatic stress disorders 20 years after their escape because they no longer have the power to cope.”
Resilience does not mean being immune to low points when the pressure is too much.
People are called resilient when they have the ability to get back up again afterwards.
r.
Rafie Ghaffarzadegan (photo:
page 30) was born in Iran.
In 1986, he was studying laboratory medicine when his brother was arrested because of a fatwa issued by Ayatollah Khomeini and executed along with hundreds of others.
Rafie, the youngest, had known for years that the regime disapproved of the critical stance he and his siblings had taken.
But the shock of his brother ’s killing was enormous:
“We did n’t want to believe it, but officials showed us his glasses and wristwatch.
His death gave rise to powerful feelings of guilt.
Your brother was executed, and you are not allowed to talk about it.
You have to act like nothing has happened.”
When government agencies denied his diploma application, Ghaffarzadegan traveled to Azerbaijan in 1992 with an
“You learn that you have to have goals and keep on living.
Dying is the easy way out.”
official authorization to continue his studies there.
He had earned the money for it with literary translations and by writing books:
“Translating Kafka or Kundera was a way for me to express criticism and still survive.”
Ghaffarzadegan also became politically active in turbulent Azerbaijan.
He had the time for it since his university studies were not recognized, and he had to study medicine all over again.
He became an advisor for Doctors without Borders, wrote about HIV – which was largely unknown at that time – and about traumatized refugee children who came into the country from Nagorno-Karabakh.
Government agencies observed the quiet Iranian, and intelligence organizations attempted to recruit him to no avail.
“Anyone who grew up in Iran learned survival strategies as a child,” says the doctor.
“People knew early on how to present a different face to the world than their real one.
But you also learn how to not give up your true self.
And you learn that you have to have goals and keep on living.
Dying is the easy way out.”
In 1999, Ghaffarzadegan went underground at a stopover in Kloten after taking a summer course at the University of Malta.
His asylum process was lengthy, but three years later he was able to begin studying psychiatry in Zurich.
These days he is married to a Swiss woman and treats many refugees as a specialist in psychiatry and psychotherapy.
“I attempt to find out where my patients’resources are, where their resilience lies.
Immigrants have to start their lives over from square one here.
Almost no one is interested in their story.
I want to give meaning to their stories and goals by talking to them about them, because people who do n’t have goals turn themselves into the goal and make themselves sick.
My goal was to keep my brother ’s memory alive by refusing to be silent.”
Beatrice Schlag is a freelance journalist in Zurich and Los Angeles.
36 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
Bulletin 4/2016 — 37
— Stability —
Natural-Born Grippers
How animals get a grip at lofty heights or in torrential mountain rivers.
By Herbert Cerutti
Goats perched atop argan trees are a common sight in southwestern Morocco.
Thanks to their cloven hooves, they are able to maintain perfect balance.
38 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
Geckos can stick it out thanks to microscopic contact surfaces.
In such dimensions, interactive forces between molecules are already working to firmly stick the gecko to the surface.
A thin liquid film on the bottom of each foot reinforces its grip even more.
For the foot to smoothly detach from the surface after each step, the gecko diagonally rolls the bottom of its foot forward so that the angle of the sticky hair attached to the surface changes and the molecular bond is released.
Why Birds Do n’t Fall From Trees When the reed warbler clings to a slender reed or the red kite sits atop a tree on the lookout for potential prey, we wonder how these birds keep their balance and manage not to grow tired and lose their grip.
Reed warblers have a good grip thanks to a special tendon.
Since it would be too hard for a bird to use pure muscle to continuously grip a branch with its claws, nature created a particularly clever solution.
When a bird settles down on a tree branch after landing, a tendon running along its leg to the foot automatically tightens – triggered by the bird ’s weight.
This causes the bird ’s toes and claws to draw in tightly, thus gripping the branch and keeping the bird secure.
This gripping reflex also enables birds to sleep high in trees, although often only one half of the brain sleeps at a time, while the other half keeps a watchful eye out for enemies, such as tree-climbing cats.
When a bird wants to fly off, it releases the tightened leg tendon by flapping its wings a few times.
This allows the toes to move freely again.
We are rarely surprised to see birds, cats and bears up in trees.
But visitors to Morocco may be treated to a truly astonishing sight:
around a dozen goats perched
Red kites are able to sleep even at great heights.
high atop the branches of argan trees.
The argan tree is an ancient species that grows only in the semidesert areas of southwest Morocco.
In this barren landscape, goats have learned that even during major periods of drought, there are succulent leaves and yellow plum-like fruit growing high in the branches of these trees.
To reach the alluring fruits and leaves, these distant tree-climbing relatives of the ibex use their natural-born sure-footedness.
Their cloven hooves enable them to stay perfectly balanced.
While the bottom part of the hoof is soft, flexible and can easily adapt to any uneven terrain, the hard part of the hoof, which protrudes somewhat, is much harder and helps the goat to firmly grab onto small protuberances.
Not only that, each half of the cloven hoof is able to shift against the other so that even on very steep slopes, the goat always has sufficient contact for a firm grip.
Strolling Through Rushing Water Where the mountain stream crashes down from the cliffs and foams and dances over boulders toward the valley below lives another natural-born gripper:
the millimeters-long larvae of the hapalothrix lugubris.
This species of the neuroptera insect family seems to make its way effortlessly through the rushing water on river rocks made slippery by algae.
Where every other mobile insect would be washed away, the larvae graze on these algae fields like tiny cows out to pasture.
Large bright spots in the brown-green algae growth are sure signs that these mountain stream residents have been chowing down.
Their secret to navigating in wild mountain waters is the row of suction cup-like pads that stretches along the six sections of their underside.
Each suction pad acts as a biophysical vacuum pump to help them grip the slippery rock surfaces.
Once the suction pad is positioned, muscles in the firm shaft tube made of chitin pull a plunger upwards, creating a vacuum in the tube.
This allows the ring-shaped adhesive disk on the end of the shaft to firmly stick to the surface without slipping.
In order to quickly release each individual suction pad from the surface, a tiny notch in the edge of the adhesive disk opens like a mouth just prior to the end
Neuroptera insect larvae have adhesive disks that enable them to stick to slippery surfaces.
of the adhesive phase.
The notch acts as a valve that floods the vacuum chamber within fractions of a second, quickly ending the adhesion.
Why all this effort to stay in the rushing mountain stream when quieter waters are usually just a few meters away?
By remaining in extremely strong river currents, the larvae have found an ecological niche where they are safe from predators and food rivals.
And humans?
When humans first stood on two legs back in prehistoric times, they may have given up their own firm, four-legged grip, but, over time, they replaced their front paws with busy hands.
They have allowed us to “grasp” the world better, and thanks to our bigger brains, we have conquered every corner of the earth, and even made it to the moon.
Herbert Cerutti is an experimental physicist and has received numerous awards for his work as a science writer.
He lives in Maseltrangen in the canton of St. Gallen.
Photos:
C&amp;M Fragasso/Visum; Ann&amp;Steve Toon/nature picture library; Pal Hermansen/nature picture library; Savero Gatto/imageBroker/Okapia; Andreas Frutiger
Bulletin 4/2016 — 39
— Stability —
“Globalization has acquired a bitter aftertaste”
The world stands at a turning point, says historian Harold James.
We live in dangerous times, and the outcome is uncertain.
A gloomy discussion, with a spark of hope at the end.
by Daniel Ammann, Simon Brunner (interview) and George Butler (illustrations)
Professor James, are we living in a more stable or more unstable world than twenty or thirty years ago?
Since 2008 the world has become much more unstable than it was in the late 20th century.
Historically speaking, it has often been the case that major financial crises had a destabilizing impact on politics and international relations, as the last one has had.
Where is that discernible?
There are so many indications!
Emerging markets, which were growing quickly until recently, are having problems; examples include China and, to a greater extent, Brazil and Turkey.
In industrialized countries, there are now many governments that are no longer able to explain their policies and win majority support
Harold James, 60, teaches history at Princeton University and international politics at the Woodrow Wilson School of &amp;
You see rising skepticism toward migration as an indication that broad swaths of the population have had enough of globalization?
Definitely.
By the way, that is also a constant throughout history.
Since Aristotle ’s time, we have seen resentment against products, influence and people who come from afar.
The American Revolution in the 18th century started with the Boston Tea Party, a protest against the import of luxury goods from India and Great Britain by the East India Company.
And during the period between the world wars in the early 20th century, there was a kind of wave of anti-globalization that targeted foreign products.
What is different today?
It ’s not so clearly about opposition to foreign products anymore; people are used to cheap T-shirts and Asian electronics and would n’t want to go without them.
Protest today is aimed more at cash flows, at banks, especially foreign banks, and at foreign creditors and lenders.
It expresses itself in vague fears, for example fear of genetic engineering – and most especially fear of migration.
This is often in areas where migration is not a problem at all, like in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, Poland or Slovakia, where there are no large waves of migration.
What is at the bottom of this rejection of foreigners?
A lower standard of living, higher unemployment?
40 — Bulletin 4/2016 Photo:
Enno Kapitza/Agentur Focus
— Stability —
1773:
BOSTON TEA PARTY
“The American revolution started with a protest against the import of luxury products by the East India Company.”
On December 16, 1773, fifty men dressed as Native Americans stormed trading ships in the port of Boston and threw 45 tons of tea in the water.
Bulletin 4/2016 — 41
— Stability —
1989:
THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL
“During the Cold War the great powers knew quite clearly that the use of nuclear weapons would have devastating consequences.”
According to James, forty years of relative stability came to an end with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
I do n’t believe that it has to do with a lower standard of living.
It is more the result of a changed environment.
People ’s expectations of stability are frustrated.
How so?
During the second half of the 20th century, that unique period of economic prosperity, people could assume that they would work for just one employer.
That has changed completely.
Only those of us in academia still enjoy that luxury.
Everyone else must adapt to changing jobs more frequently.
This loss of security, this not knowing what the future will bring, has a very destabilizing effect.
Globalization has acquired a bitter aftertaste.
Could it possibly be reversed?
Yes, quite clearly, we know that from history.
The wheel of globalization has already been turned back from time to time – and today there is a lot of pull in that direction.
Globalization is in much greater danger today than it was in the second half of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21s t century.
You come to the conclusion in your work that many eras of globalization collapsed in the end due to military conflict.
Do you see that risk today as well?
Unfortunately, yes.
People tend to forget that the period from 1949 to the fall of the Berlin Wall was relatively stable, that war is an absolute disaster.
The Cold War as a time of stability?
You ’ll have to explain that.
During the Cold War, people knew quite clearly that the use of nuclear weapons would have devastating consequences.
A Soviet missile strike on Frankfurt or Paris would have led immediately to a counter-strike.
The great powers knew that they would be bombing their way to the end of civilization.
Today there are many more smaller conflicts where the combatants have already said that the use of tactical nuclear weapons is no longer absolutely taboo.
It ’s no longer possible to assess exactly whether that would elicit a reaction.
That makes their deployment easier.
That is a huge source of instability.
We live in dangerous times.
Where do you see the unstable regions that could threaten escalation?
You ca n’t reduce it to a single area.
There is an arc of conflict that stretches from the South China Sea through Central Asia to the Middle East and North Africa.
It ’s like a tectonic stress field.
Which era would you be most likely to compare to our current time?
I see many parallels to the time before the First World War.
In 1914 many people assumed, by the way, that the world was so closely interconnected – by trade or by new means of communication – that a war was no longer conceivable.
Many people thought at the time that it would only be a short, not very destructive war.
History does not have to repeat itself.
Of course, history never repeats itself
42 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability — exactly.
But there are these general tendencies:
an era of greater insulation and retreat follows an epoch of greater international cooperation and connectivity.
But humanity has developed since then.
Technologies develop, humanity does not.
Humanity ’s civilizing and economic progress does n’t count?
I see no signs whatsoever that people have become better, more intelligent or more peaceful.
There ’s that famous book by evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker, “The Better Angels of Our Nature,” which argues that humanity has generally become more peaceful.
Unfortunately, I do not share that opinion.
There are sources of conflict that are inherent in human nature.
Aristotle would be able to describe our current world just as well as a 21s t-century philosopher.
What comes after globalization?
There will be a trend toward states becoming more insular, toward more self-contained economies, toward a society that is more restrictive when it comes to migration, the exchange of goods and capital flows.
The call for a strong man will only grow louder.
And there are historical precedents for this.
Italian and German fascism and Stalinism were also anti-globalization models.
On a completely different, much less radical level, we can already observe such autocratic
Democracy developed in a more stable direction in Switzerland than in most other European countries.
tendencies again today in Russia, in Turkey, in Eastern Europe.
These tendencies are drawing more and more followers in Western Europe.
Is n’t that paradoxical?
We always assumed that the globalization of the last thirty or forty years would lead to more prosperity and less poverty in the world.
That is correct.
Poverty has been greatly reduced in many countries, which is one of the major achievements of globalization.
But as I already said, at the same time globalization has also increased instability and uncertainty.
Particularly smaller states like Switzerland, Luxembourg or Singapore have profited from globalization.
This anti-globalization trend, these tendencies to retreat:
What do they mean for these successful, well-to-do small states?
You bring up an important point.
You could truly call those small states the winners of globalization.
In addition to those you mentioned, they also include New Zealand, Ireland and for a time, even Lebanon and Kuwait.
People tend to forget that the latter two countries were also stable and successful, until they fell victim to their dangerous surroundings.
Paraphrasing Schiller, even the most industrious cannot live in prosperity when their surroundings take a turn for the worse.
That is currently a real risk facing Singapore and Switzerland.
It would be foolish to believe that Switzerland could be unaffected by a more unstable Europe.
When collapse and radicalization are occurring beyond your borders, there will of course be blowback in Switzerland too.
But can I return briefly to your previous question about the winners of globalization?
Please.
If you had asked me during the 1990s who would profit most from globalization, I would have said the small states that are particularly dependent on international exchange.
Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and even more so since the financial crisis of 2008, however, we have observed a new version of globalization, one that is bound up with political and military power.
Today it ’s more China and the US that appear to be the winners of globalization.
You know Switzerland well.
It is extremely stable politically and economically, as well as socially successful.
What do you, as an economic historian, see as the reasons for that?
It ’s interesting that there are several forces at work in Switzerland that are in principle centrifugal:
multi-lingualism, the city/country divide, religious differences – the minor civil war in the 19th century, the Sonderbund War, that was also a religious conflict.
How did Switzerland get a grip on these centrifugal forces?
With good institutions.
With political responsibility.
With representative government on all political levels:
municipal, cantonal, national.
Democracy in Switzerland developed in a more stable direction than in most other European countries.
In what way?
In Europe outside of Switzerland, people had been long accustomed to changing
Bulletin 4/2016 — 43
— Stability — from center right to center left and back again.
When they were not satisfied with the government, they simply voted for the other party.
The parties of the center became more and more alike.
In Germany, for example, there are almost no differences anymore between the SPD and the CDU.
So voters are turning to more radical options at both ends of the political spectrum.
What do anti-globalization tendencies mean for the future of Switzerland as a financial center?
The country ’s extraordinary political stability is surely positive, along with the traditional stability of the Swiss franc.
For generations now, it has been one of the most solid currencies in the world.
The greater the fear of a big collapse, the more that Russian, Chinese and citizens of other countries want to put their money in safe countries like Switzerland.
It will not be easy for Switzerland as a financial center, however.
With every previous wave of anti-globalization, capital flows were nationalized as much as possible so that the citizens could n’t take their money to another country.
Are these low interest rates an historical rarity?
There have been real negative interest rates fairly often in the last sixty, seventy years.
In the 1970s, for instance, after the oil crisis, nominal interest rates were rather high.
But inflation rates were so high that in many countries, real interest rates were negative.
Negative nominal interest rates, however, like we have today in Europe and Japan, are unique.
Only Switzerland imposed them once, in 1978.
That of course unleashes great fear.
How do we get out of this situation now?
It wo n’t be easy.
With each attempt by the US central bank to increase interest rates, you very quickly see the negative effects on emerging countries.
It ’s like taking a powerful medicine and being
If you cannot trust the state, who do you trust?
Your relatives.
unable to stop because you ’ve become addicted; the consequences of stopping would be painful and unbearable.
Low interest rates are also a debt trap for governments.
They make themselves increasingly vulnerable if or when an end comes.
What do you think leaders will try in order to kick this “addiction”?
Perhaps the 1950s and 1960s can be taken as a guide.
It was a very successful time economically, although the capital markets were very insular.
It might seem attractive to introduce strict capital controls on a global level in order to stabilize the international market.
That would make it much easier to service each country ’s own public expenditures and debts within the national context.
Do you regard that as probable?
There is a certain logic to it.
And there are few alternatives.
Is that an ominous scenario?
Certainly.
It would further reverse globalization and continue to dissolve international cooperation.
44 — Bulletin 4/2016
— Stability —
In your research, you conclude that in times of crisis, family-owned companies have a stabilizing impact.
Can you expand on that?
I started by asking why family capitalism developed so much more fully in Continental Europe than in Great Britain or the US in the 18th and 19th centuries.
I attributed that to prolonged political instability in Europe.
If you cannot trust the state, who do you trust?
Your relatives.
It is a good solution for certain services and industrial products that are based on longevity and sustainability.
In your book “Family Capitalism” you show that women played an enormously important role in the economy during that period.
Many European industrial enterprises were directed by women at that time.
The French and German iron industries would have been inconceivable without them.
How did that happen?
They were almost all widows who took over the family enterprise after the death of their husbands and managed them very successfully.
In Germany, for example, Therese Krupp or Aletta Haniel; in France, Joséphine de Fischer de Dicourt of the De-Wendel dynasty and of course Barbe-Nicole Clicquot-Ponsardin, whose Veuve Clicquot champagne is still worldfamous today.
The women guaranteed continuity across generations.
During times of crisis, these “DNA chains,” as I call them, held not only those family companies together, but the capitalist economic system itself.
Women did not play such a significant role in those companies later.
What happened?
The corporation.
The corporation, by the middle/end of the 19th century, provided an institution that could legally ensure a company ’s continuity.
Women were n’t needed any longer.
They were virtually excluded from what became a man ’s world.
You have a gloomy view of the world situation.
Do you see any positive elements?
I see hope, for example, in the medical field.
Radical innovations are possible there.
There is already talk of the possibility of effectively fighting Alzheimer ’s.
That would be an enormous breakthrough.
The interview was conducted on September 5, 2016.
19TH CENTURY THE TIME OF THE WIDOWS
“These DNA chains held family companies together through periods of crisis.”
Many European industrial enterprises were successfully managed by widows.
World-famous today thanks to her champagne:
Barbe-Nicole Clicquot-Ponsardin.
Bulletin 4/2016 — 45
— Stability —
The photos on this page were all taken by tourists in Pisa.
They were found on the photo platform Flickr.
An Out-of-Kilter Survival Artist
The Leaning Tower of Pisa has been a miracle of stability for 831 years now.
Its secret:
a solid foundation.
By Mathias Plüss
46 — Bulletin 4/2016
Photos:
niall62/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; April Weeks/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Katrina/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Kim/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; Tammy Lo/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Darren&amp; Brad/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; Chris Street/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Chris Sampson/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Josh Evnin/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; Tammy Lo/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Shu/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; Darren&amp; Brad/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; James Manners/flickr/CC BY-SA 2.0; Gabriel Garcia Marengo/flickr/CC BY 2.0; Aanjhan Ranganathan/flickr/CC BY 2.0
— Stability —
It tilts and leans and still it stands.
For 831 years, the Leaning Tower of Pisa has had to withstand the tension generated by its own tilted situation.
The top of the tower has gradually shifted more than four meters from perpendicular.
Earthquakes have shaken it, bombs and lightning have struck it.
The tower stoically shrugs off these challenges, with only the fissures in its marble facade giving witness to the strength they have cost it.
Why did its nearly 15,000 tons of weight not simply collapse long ago?
Because the tower is stabilized by a massive pedestal that is embedded in its foundation.
The people who built it knew what they were doing.
But that was not enough.
The sandy clay soil under that foundation was unstable.
Twelve years after construction began in 1173, the tower started to tilt for the first time, giving it a slight inclination.
The work was then put aside for a hundred years, during which time the soil settled.
Subsequent floors were intentionally built at a slight angle in an attempt to correct its vertical axis.
But history repeated itself.
Once again the substrate gave way.
Another hundred years later, a belfry was added to the tower.
It had now reached its final height of 55 meters – the original plan had called for a hundred.
It is not without irony that Galileo Galilei did an experiment involving the effect of gravity at just this place, which seemingly defies the very forces of gravity.
That is, at least according to a well-known anecdote.
In 1590, before a gathering of scholars from the University of Pisa, he is said to have dropped two balls of different weights from the tower.
They hit the ground at the same time, which proved that the speed of their fall did not depend on their weight.
But as correct as the law of falling bodies is, historians still argue over whether Galilei ever actually performed this experiment.
Most likely, it happened only in his mind.
Luckily, some other plans were likewise never realized, including by the Mafia and most recently by Tunisian jihadists to attack the tower.
In contrast, a much greater danger has been posed by engineers with the best of intentions.
Almost all of the numerous attempts to stabilize the tower have been counterproductive.
For instance, in 1995 there was a plan to pour a ring of concrete around the foundation, so first underground water was pumped out for that purpose.
Unfortunately, no one realized that the ground above, which had been temporarily frozen to provide stability, would collapse once it thawed.
Again, the building sagged.
Only nine hundred tons of lead ingots kept it from keeling over.
The next idea finally provided some relief for this artist of survival, for the first time in its long history.
About thirty tons of earth were carefully removed on the north side, which resulted in the tower tilting about forty centimeters – in the right direction this time!
The city was finally able to re-open the tower to tourists after eleven years in 2001.
Supposedly, the leaning tower is now safe for the next three hundred years – at least according to the engineers!
Mathias Plüss is a freelance science journalist.
Bulletin 4/2016 — 47 CREDIT SUISSE
Man and Machine – How We Change Each Other
Big interview with digital pioneer Sebastian Thrun Page 22 CREDIT SUISSE
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
2/2016
From Swiss Myth to the Longest Tunnel in the World
— Stability —
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
3/2016
Bulletin
With Credit Suisse ’s# youthbarometer# 2016
Bulletin
A clear view...
075360 E
Digital World, Analog Life
Comments
Bulletin “Digital/Analog,” 3/2016
075360 E
Gottardo
Comments
Bulletin “Gottardo,” 2/2016
Service
A Unique Voice Credit Suisse Bulletin is a wonderful magazine.
I myself have worked in the media and I live in New York, where there is no lack of publications.
But Bulletin has a unique voice.
Financial institutions are changing like never before, and Bulletin is a good way for Credit Suisse to set itself apart.
Falguni Desai, New York, USA
I Never Miss an Issue I would n’t miss an issue of your magazine for anything in the world; I love it.
Jocelyne Chapuis, Gland
Swiss Outlook with a Global Perspective I am a Swiss attorney working in Italy.
I appreciate the Swiss outlook you bring to your topics, while never losing sight of the global perspective.
Hats off to you and keep up the good work!
Andrea Angeletti, Venice, Italy
Interesting!
I came across a copy of Bulletin at Zurich airport while waiting for my flight to Malta.
As a former banker and an English teacher, I think your magazine is very interesting.
Albert Dimech, Sliema, Malta
Easy to Understand I really enjoyed the last issue.
The description of the construction of the first and second Gotthard tunnels was very detailed, well written and easy to understand.
J.
F.
, Germany
Much Needed I ’d like to thank you once again for your very interesting magazine.
We all read every issue with great interest and feel it fills a much-needed niche.
J.
Abplanalp, Stiftung Kinder im Glück (Children ’s Foundation), Zurich
First-Class Issue A first-class issue of this magazine!
As an engineer, I was particularly impressed by the article “Two Tracks, a Lot of Concrete and Even More Technology.”
The SBB project manager, Peter Jedelhauser, beautifully explained why the project was so successful.
I wish Credit Suisse continued success on its path for Switzerland and – for Bulletin readers so inclined – many more such extremely interesting issues.
Rolf Molls, Weinfelden
We welcome all letters to the editor.
The editors reserve the right to select and edit the letters.
Write to us at:
Email:
bulletin@abk.ch Address:
Credit Suisse AG, Bulletin Editorial Team, HTG, CH-8070 Zurich
Follow us!
Subscribe to Credit Suisse Bulletin for free
Write an email with your address to:
abo.bulletin@credit-suisse.com www.twitter.com/creditsuisse www.facebook.com/creditsuisse www.youtube.com/creditsuisse www.flickr.com/creditsuisse
Archive Back issues of Bulletin are available digitally:
www.credit-suisse.com/bulletin
Publishing Details:
Published by:
Credit Suisse AG, project management:
Christoph G. Meier, Mandana Razavi, contributors:
Jessica Cunti, Yanik Schubiger, Simon Staufer, content design, editing:
Ammann, Brunner&amp;Krobath AG (www.abk.ch), design concept, layout, production Crafft Kommunikation AG (www.crafft.ch), photo editing:
Studio Andreas Wellnitz, Berlin, pre-press:
n c ag (www.ncag.ch), printer:
Stämpfli AG, circulation:
110,000
Editorial committee:
Oliver Adler, Felix Baumgartner, Thomas Beyeler, René P. Buholzer, Béatrice Fischer, André Helfenstein, Anja Hochberg, Markus Kleeb, Carsten Luther, Jean-Luc Rochat, Manuel Rybach, Robert Wagner, Gabriele Zanzi
PERFORMANCE neutral Printed Matter
No. 01- 16- 595339 – www.myclimate.org © myclimate – The Climate Protection Partnership
48 — Bulletin 4/2016 Credit Suisse
One of the largest and oldest popular surveys in Switzerland is celebrating its 40th anniversary.
A sweeping review of four decades of the country ’s concerns, the current results and a look ahead to see what the future might bring.
CONTENTS
40 Years of Worry Barometer
50 Review
Analysis 2016
60 What the Swiss Worry About 63 Voice of Business:
Peter Grünenfelder 64 Voice of Politics:
Jürg Stahl 66 The Essence of Switzerland
Future
69 What Will Preoccupy Us 70 How We Will Work 72 The Last Page:
A Happy and Satisfied Country
Worry Barometer Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary
The History of Swiss Sensitivity
René P. Buholzer is head of the Public Policy unit at Credit Suisse (Schweiz) AG and is responsible for global sustainability issues.
He holds a PhD in political science and teaches at the University of St. Gallen – Graduate School of Business, Economics, Law and Social Science.
Editorial assistants:
Simon Brunner, Lukas Golder, Oliver Heer.
The Credit Suisse Worry Barometer has been taking the people ’s temperature since 1976.
The launch of the survey was groundbreaking, and its uninterrupted longevity offers unique insights into the changes in what has been on Switzerland ’s mind over the years.
By René P. Buholzer
In 1976, the father of a nation, Mao Zedong, died in office.
Helmut Schmidt won the election for Federal Chancellor over Helmut Kohl in Germany; Jimmy Carter prevailed over the incumbent president, Gerald Ford, in the US.
Czechoslovakia won the European Football Championship.
Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak founded Apple.
Milton Friedman received the Nobel Prize in Economics.
And in Switzerland?
Lugano had over 2,046 hours of sunlight, and ABBA dominated the hit parade with “Fernando.”
In 1976, around 6.3 million people lived here, foreigners accounting for 15.6 percent.
Rudolf Gnägi (BGB/SVP) became President of the Swiss Confederation once again after first being elected to that office in 1971.
Yet the mood was somber in the late’70s
“The idea of introducing the Worry Barometer was visionary,” says political scientist Lukas Golder, co-director of gfs.
bern, the company that has conducted the study since 1995.
“At that time, public opinion research was slowly emerging and was dominated by market and consumer research.
Another reason it was visionary is that they collected representative opinions of the populace, and in this way, the survey did not follow the rhythm of a vote,” says Golder.
“The results were provided to the public.
Up until that time, the preconception prevailed that direct democracy provided enough information about public opinion.”
50 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary
Today, in 2016, there are several public opinion polls in Switzerland.
But despite the competition, the Worry Barometer has managed to maintain its extraordinary standing.
Whenever the latest edition is published, just in time for the opening of the winter session of the Swiss parliament, many politicians can be seen with their copy under their arm as they walk through the lobby of the parliament building.
And many (political) initiatives begin with “X percent of Swiss citizens are very concerned about...,” using a figure from the Barometer.
The basic structure of the survey ’s methodology has not changed throughout the years.
Around 1,000 respondents are selected and interviewed in person.
They are shown cards with the instructions “On these cards, you will see some themes that have been discussed and written about a lot recently:
Please take a look at the cards, and pick out the five cards that you personally feel are Switzerland ’s greatest problems.”
This year, the Credit Suisse Worry Barometer is celebrating its 40th birthday.
One of the oldest and largest political opinion polls thus covers some of the most interesting and turbulent years of Switzerland ’s history.
What does it reveal?
The Anniversary in 11 Chapters
Camping on the A1 highway on a car-free Sunday during the oil crisis.
1 The Crisis Triggers Fear
FIRST ISSUE IN 1976
The topics in the next spots are also familiar ones:
the tax burden (51 percent), inflation (48 percent) and education (42 percent).
In terms of the economy, 1976 was a tense year, something that is noticeable throughout the entire survey.
Interestingly, the strong Swiss franc was a problem then just as it is today.
The mention of “inflation” as a major issue went hand in hand with strong agreement (81 percent) with the state-
Photo:
RDB
51 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary ment that there is an urgent or a very urgent need to fight inflation.
The study ’s author interpreted this to represent the “healthy sense of stability and solidity among our people.”
Not surprisingly, the author was happy that 88 percent of those surveyed opposed higher taxes.
Even then, the standardization of the school system was a current concern, 92 percent considered it to be urgent.
Building new universities was rejected – perhaps considered too expensive?
– yet subsidies for vocational schools (83 percent agreement) were supported – because this would also be a way to combat unemployment.
Not least, the 1976 Worry Barometer focused on questions about the financial center, which did very well in general.
Only 27 percent were against banking confidentiality, and only 20 percent considered the banks to hold too much power, something viewed as an “exaggerated problem.”
The biggest concerns in 1976:
1 Unemployment 2 Environmental protection 3 Retirement provision 4 Tax burden 5 Inflation 6 Education 7 Economic policy 8 Foreign workers 9 Residential construction 10 Bank power
…
and in 2016
1 Unemployment 2 Foreigners 3 Retirement provision 4 Refugees/asylum seekers 5 EU/bilateral agreements 6 Health 7 Euro crisis/euro exchange rate 8 New poverty 9 Traffic 10 Personal safety
2 Part of the Swiss Identity
TOP-RANKED CONCERN:
UNEMPLOYMENT
From an international perspective, unemployment in Switzerland has never been high, although it has frequently been the most-mentioned problem among those surveyed throughout the 40 years of
Concern about Unemployment and Unemployment Rates
80 in% unemployment concerns Bankruptcy of the Spar+Leihkasse Thun (1991)
CONCERN ABOUT UNEMPLOYMENT
1993 – 1998:
The unemployment rate climbs to an all-time high of 5.2 percent (1997).
After citizens rejected the EEA in 1992, the economic mood remained gloomy.
40 1976 – 1988:
In 1970, only 104 people are out of work in Switzerland.
But directly following the first oil crisis (1973), the country goes into a recession.
In 1984, the unemployment rate climbs over 1 percent for the first time since the 1930s.
1990 – 1993:
But then the real estate bubble bursts.
The Spar+Leihkasse Thun is forced to close (1991), the face of the crisis, and the economy contracts.
This time, even well-educated people are left out on the street.
The concern hits its historical peak in 1993 (89 percent).
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
CHANGE IN GDP
– 20
Vote on European Economic Area (1992)
1988 – 1990:
The concern falls to its lowest level ever measured.
Only 21 percent are concerned about their job in 1990.
The GDP also grows rapidly during these years.
52 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary the Worry Barometer.
It has topped the list of worries in each of the last 10 years.
Why?
“The fear of unemployment is symptomatic of the decline of the middle class, whose members are anxious about their financial independence and social status,” writes Jean Christophe Schwaab, member of the National Council representing the Social Democratic Party and former General Secretary of the Swiss Federation of Trade Unions in the last issue of Compass for Switzerland, a special Credit Suisse publication on the topic.
Valentin Vogt, president of the Confederation of Swiss Employers, agrees with him to the extent that the strong significance of unemployment is anything but phantom pain.
“In Switzerland in particular, an individual ’s work and career are a vital part of his or her identity.”
The data support this statement.
Throughout the years, those surveyed have observed the changes in the labor market very carefully.
Real peaks in the unemployment rate and in gross domestic product (GDP) are directly reflected in the Worry Barometer.
3 Status Quo Too Good for Reforms
TOP-RANKED CONCERN:
FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS’INSURANCE (AHV)
In the last ten years, over 40 percent of the Swiss consider retirement provision/AHV to be Switzerland ’s biggest problem; in 1976, it was 63 percent.
At the same time, AHV also has a history of failed reforms.
The last successful reform was 21 years ago, and the public has routinely rejected any proposals introduced since then.
2004:
The 11th AHV amendment and value added tax increase for AHV/Federal Disability Insurance; 2010:
Adjustment of the minimum conversion rate in the occupational pension provision.
How do these things go together?
2002 – 2008:
The dot-com boom which began around 1997 is responsible for some of the growth, but in the US the bubble burst in 2000.
Unemployment figures begin to increase in Switzerland a bit later, up to almost 4 percent.
6 in% Unemployment rate Change in GDP 4.5 3
1998 – 2002:
The GDP begins to grow more rapidly, climbing up to 3.9 percent in 2000, while at the same time the unemployment rate falls to 1.8 percent.
The good times do not go unnoticed.
In the same year, only 34 percent of those surveyed fear losing their job.
2008 – 2016:
The financial crisis brings the next shock, as GDP is briefly negative and worries about unemployment begin to increase again.
Stock market crash in the US (2000) – 1.5
Photos:
Keystone; Walter Bieri/Keystone; Richard Drew/AP Photo/Keystone
53 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary
One explanation could be that, in principle, everyone can agree that something has to be done, which is why the issue ranks near the top in the Worry Barometer.
Since AHV was introduced in 1948, life expectancy at birth has increased by 14.3 years (for men) and 14.0 years (for women).
At the same time, the birthrate has declined from 2.40 to 1.54 (2.08 children per woman would be necessary to maintain the population balance).
The population pyramid is growing less and less favorable for a contribution system like AHV.
The problem has been identified, but for the majority, a “solution” is less desirable than the status quo.
Older people would have to work longer or give up part of their pension.
According to a study conducted by Avenir Suisse, the average age of eligible voters will be 60 by the year 2021.
In other words, decisions on proposals will be made by the over-60 age group almost entirely alone.
The term “pension theft” is so firmly entrenched in the collective conscience that any pension reduction is immediately considered to be a political impossibility.
The younger generation is aware of the problem, which always ranks among the topmost of Switzerland ’s biggest problems in the Credit Suisse Youth Barometer.
But young people alone cannot sway the vote and seem ultimately to also want to benefit from a strong first pillar.
Furthermore, the AHV seems to have become part of Switzerland ’s success story and the Swiss identity.
Finally, every 20-year-old may not be aware that he or she is among the losers under the current system – the younger age groups meanwhile are not only funding the AHV but also the overly high conversion rate in the second pillar, currently at 6.8 percent (mandatory part, planned in 2018:
6.6 percent).
According to Avenir Suisse, only 5.4 percent is financeable.
The status quo is also attractive because the overall principle of the pension provision made up of three pillars (federal, occupational and private pension provision) is becoming more and more effective.
Those retiring after a longer period of gainful employment generally receive money from two or three sources.
Poverty in old age is on the decline, and today ’s poor are helped by supplementary benefits.
In addition, there is health insurance, which represents a solution based on solidarity for the health issues which are a major problem with increasing age.
Under the health insurance, younger people pay more than the costs that they incur, while older people pay less.
Around 1,000 seasonal workers arrive at Buchs train station in St. Gallen from the former Yugoslavia on March 14, 1978.
Concerns about Foreigners and the Number of Foreigners in Switzerland
50 in% Concern about foreigners* 0
1976 – 1987:
Fewer than one million foreigners live in Switzerland.
Following the “Schwarzenbach Initiative” against foreign penetration (1970), the topic does not again play a major role in the Worry Barometer until 1985.
4 How to Coexist?
TOP-RANKED CONCERN:
FOREIGNERS/IMMIGRATION
Coexisting with the foreign population is a consistently important theme in the Worry Barometer.
In 1976, people were worried about foreign
1987 – 2003:
Immigration increases sharply until 1995 due to the Balkan Wars.
The percentage of foreigners continues to grow after that but less rapidly.
* This concern was not recorded from 1977 to 1981 or from 1989 to 1994.
54 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016
Anniversary
5 Differentiated Viewpoint
REFUGEES/ASYLUM ISSUES workers (32 percent, ranked 8th), then talk was of “foreign penetration”; later, one category is created for “Foreigners/free movement of persons/immigration” and a second for “Refugees/asylum issues.”
Although this differentiation is sometimes disregarded in the public debate, it is highly prevalent among respondents, even though the correlation between these two concerns is weak.
Nevertheless, there is one interdependency – but with a different indicator rooted in political realities:
When the number of foreigners in Switzerland increases, worries about coexistence also grow.
In addition, the respondents are highly attuned to (global) political changes influencing immigration.
2003 – 2007:
Free movement of persons with the European Union takes effect on June 1, 2002.
Along with it, worries about immigration begin to increase – with a slight delay, but therefore all the more rapidly – up to 35 percent (2007).
2.5 million foreigners in Switzerland 1995 – 1999:
Applications for asylum more than double due to the Balkan Wars, reaching nearly 50,000 in 1999.
1999 – 2009:
From 1999 to 2000, applications for asylum decline by 60 percent and reach their lowest point in 2005 with fewer than 11,000 applications.
Restrictions on the right of asylum are introduced several times during these years.
The topic loses some of its urgency in the Worry Barometer as well.
2009 – 2016:
Once again, more refugees come to Switzerland; just under 40,000 applications are submitted in 2015 – worries are twice that seen in 2009.
This concern is also correlated with a statistical indicator in Switzerland:
the number of applications for asylum submitted.
After the unemployment rate, the number of applications for asylum seems to be the number perceived most strongly and the one that elicits a direct consequence of political reaction.
Accordingly, a series of restrictions on the right of asylum have been introduced over the last twenty years.
But the result of this year ’s Worry Barometer seems to indicate that the Swiss are now more satisfied than in past years.
The concern decreased – despite the many headlines on the topic of refugees – from 35 percent to 26 percent.
Concerns about asylum issues, asylum applications
60 in%, Concerns about asylum issues 60,000 applications for asylum 0 0
6 Bilateral Agreements
EU/BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
2007 – 2009:
A brief period of calm, perhaps due to the fact that – despite the free movement of persons – the percentage of foreigners increased by only 0.7 percent from 2001 until 2006, the same increase seen between 1996 and 2001.
0 2005 2010 2015 2009 – 2016:
Concerns about coexistence increase significantly, until they even replace unemployment as the top concern in 2014.
Between 2007 and 2014, the percentage of foreigners increases by 3.6 percentage points.
That represents up to 67,000 more people living in Switzerland each year.
Moreover, in 2009, the citizens of Switzerland vote to expand free movement of persons to include Bulgaria and Romania; it takes effect on June 1, 2016.
The Mass Immigration Initiative aimed at managing immigration is approved in 2014.
Switzerland ’s relationship with the EU has dominated political discussions for years, and this concern was reflected in respondents’answers.
But this year, “EU/bilateral agreements” ranked only sixth (22 percent).
Why?
Bilateral agreements are the only option capable of attaining majority support.
In the Worry Barometer, 67 percent of respondents stated that it was preferable to continue this course.
Most will not support a unilateral decision, much less joining the EU.
Photo:
Photopress Archiv/Keystone
55 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary
7 Bark Beetles, etc.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
From 1976 to 1991, environmental protection was always among the top three concerns, but it has since become less pressing.
In 2007, the issue was mentioned by only 7 percent of those surveyed.
Has the problem been solved, like the drug issue?
No. This trend tells another story.
The magazine Der Spiegel sounded the alarm in the fall of 1981.
A cover illustrated by billowing smokestacks, clouds of gas and bare trees declared “Acid Rain over Germany – The Forests Are Dying.”
In 1983, Federal Councillor Alphons Egli paid a visit to the Baan National Forest near Zofingen where representatives of the Federal Forestry Office were learning about new symptoms of disease.
Trees that would hardly be noticed by a layperson were considered by the foresters to be “at the brink of death.”
This example from the newspaper NZZ shows that the issue had several different aspects.
First of all, environmental protection was a non-partisan issue.
Egli was a Federal Councillor of the Christian Democratic People ’s Party, the NZZ was considered mainstream and Der Spiegel as social democratic.
Secondly, the situation was being dramatized.
Concerns about the Environment in% 73 1976 2016 13
Swiss Federal Councillor Alphons Egli (left), Head Cantonal Forester August Studer (middle) and Member of the Cantonal Council Kurt Lareida assess the diseased forests at the national forest in Zofingen.
Many of the problems turned out to be less serious than originally thought.
Yet the goal had been achieved.
People were concerned about the environment, as the Worry Barometer showed, and this concern could be used to achieve political ends, including discussing speed limits on highways and implementing car-free Sundays.
Switzerland ’s Green Party was founded (1983) in this climate, and the party soon reached a 6.1 percent share of the votes and 14 seats in the National Council in 1991.
After a low point in the subsequent election year, the Green Party garnered 7.4 percent of the vote (13 seats) in 2003 – although environmental issues had lost ground by this time.
But at least the Green Party emancipated itself somewhat from the eco-alarmism of dying forests and the like.
They transformed into the left alternative party to the Social Democrats.
In turn, another group of environmentalists later found their new home in the Green Liberal Party, as concerns about the environment shot upwards again, from 7 percent (2006) to 25 percent (2007).
One reason could be that Europe was affected by an unusual abundance of natural disasters that year, and the Green Party had a record election year (9.6 percent, 20 seats).
In contrast, after the disaster at the nuclear power plant in Fukushima in 2011, concerns about the environment did not peak – even the worry about “energy issues/nuclear energy/security of supply” increased by a mere four percentage points.
1983
56 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016
Anniversary
8 Detox Successful!
DRUG USE/ALCOHOL ABUSE
Between 1978 and 1994, 65 percent of respondents considered drugs to be a major problem in Switzerland.
Yet this fell to only 15 percent on average from 1995 to 2016.
What happened?
Hard drugs were already widespread during the unrest in the 1980s.
In 1987, the public drug scene took root in Zurich.
Up to 3,000 drug addicts lived in Platzspitz park near the Swiss National Museum in Zurich, an area that gained international notoriety as Needle Park.
One percent of the then 24- to 25-year-old Swiss became addicted to heroin, and nearly everyone had an addict in their close family or circle of friends.
The drug scene at Zurich ’s Platzspitz in June 1990.
In 1991, 21 people died from drug use in Platzspitz park; another 3,600 were resuscitated after overdosing.
In the following year, there were 419 drug fatalities in all of Switzerland, most of those dying from heroin use.
The government reacted:
The first package of measures aimed at alleviating the drug problem was introduced in 1991.
Platzspitz was cleared in 1992, followed by the closure of the abandoned Letten train station – and, in effect, Zurich ’s last public drug scene – in 1995.
A record number of political measures on drug policy were introduced in the Swiss Federal and State Councils in 1994, after which the number dwindled rapidly.
The drug problem was ultimately solved through a traditionally Swiss compromise consisting of four pillars:
prevention, therapy, damage mitigation, and law enforcement and market controls.
The radical part of this approach was the controlled dispensation of hard drugs, which made headlines around the world.
The number of drug fatalities was cut by half by 1999, and the concern nearly disappeared from the Worry Barometer (2016:
10 percent).
And among today ’s young people, drugs are a minor issue.
In the Credit Suisse Youth Barometer, which analyzes the state of 16- to 25-year-olds, the majority of respondents (53 percent) considered drugs to be “out,” and they did not use them – the only thing less popular than drug use was a “cell phone without internet” (81 percent).
9 No Longer a Problem?
TAX BURDEN
Concerns about Drugs and Drug Fatalities
100 in% of concerns 500 drug fatalities 0 0
In the first Worry Barometer from 1976, the tax burden was a major topic, with 51 percent worried about it, which placed it fourth among top concerns.
And in a supplementary question, 88 percent rejected tax increases.
In the years that follow, the topic became less important.
A good 25 percent of respondents mentioned the tax burden in the 1980s, around 20 percent in the 1990s and early 2000s, and from 2009 onwards, only approximately 10 percent.
Today, as well, the tax situation concerns 9 percent of those surveyed.
Yet there is a
Photo:
Keystone (2)
57 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Anniversary growing focus on other government-imposed payments, especially on the annually increasing health insurance premiums.
Those concerns even reached 64 percent (2001).
That figure paralleled the annual increases in the premiums – here, too, the electorate was highly sensitive to changes in the relevant indicator.
The fact that taxes are no longer among the top ten concerns likely has something to do with no party or movement fully embracing the issue.
Slogans referencing “taxes” were rare during last year ’s national elections, while they were frequently seen in the 1970s and 1980s.
Finally, the public has seldom been as unified at the ballot box as they were in the vote on the debt brake:
85 percent were in favor of requiring Switzerland to balance revenue and spending through the business cycle – a measure intended to prevent overly expansive government actions.
In addition, this fiscal policy has become an international ideal and a top export.
10 Institutions of the Heart
TRUST
The Worry Barometer includes not only questions about the problems of the Swiss, but also how much trust they have in the country ’s institutions.
And when it comes to politics, this trust is very strong:
62 percent trust the Council of States, 61 percent the Federal Council, and 57 percent the
Trust in Institutions
Federal Palace, fall session of the federal parliament, Wednesday, September 21, 2016
National Council.
Trust has increased by around ten percentage points in all three of these categories since 2010.
How do these results line up internationally?
For the OECD countries, the average trust in government is at 42 percent.
The most obvious explanation for the good results of Swiss politicians is that trust is built by including all relevant decision-makers.
Switzerland has a well-functioning semi-professional parliament, which is among the most cost effective in Europe.
This country ’s democracy fosters compromises that can be upheld and laws that are observed.
In addition, people in Switzerland are prospering and feel secure – especially in an international comparison.
Trust in politicians is at an all-time high, while the main concerns are declining at the same time.
It would seem that the public is very satisfied with the government in Berne, particularly compared to the other countries in Europe.
80 in% Federal Council Federal Supreme Court Council of States National Council Swiss National Bank 0
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
58
Photo:
Anthony Anex/Keystone Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016
Anniversary
11 A Good Crystal Ball
FORECASTING ABILITY
Respondents have demonstrated a highly rational view of Switzerland.
The various chapters illustrate that the problems mentioned in the Worry Barometer have been closely linked to actual events.
So now the question:
How is the forecasting ability of the Swiss?
Every year they are asked to evaluate the upcoming twelve months.
Will
9 4 Economic Situation in% 1995 Forecast:
will improve Review:
did improve
2015 20 18 the economy get better or worse?
At the same time, they are asked to describe how they felt about the last twelve months.
When these two curves are laid on top of each other and shifted by one year to superimpose the same year ’s forecast and review, the respondents do indeed have a very good sense of economic trends.
The good news:
for 2017, 22 percent of those surveyed predicted improvement (63 percent:
no change; 14 percent:
deterioration; 1 percent:
do n’t know).
Conclusion:
Over the Worry Barometer ’s 40 years, two factors have been decisive for how people perceive problems.
1.
Urgency:
How virulent is an issue, and how intensely is it discussed in the media?
Many concerns relate directly to actual events.
The issue of drugs/drug use/alcohol abuse became more significant as drug fatalities increased in Switzerland.
The same was the case for acid rain and environmental protection.
2.
Relevance:
How important is a problem for the respondent ’s personal situation?
Unemployment affects us deeply, and correspondingly, it ranks relatively highly even in times of a strong economy.
Relevance determines a sort of basic meaning for an issue.
Drugs and environmental protection, for example, are fundamentally less relevant issues.
A great deal has to happen in these areas for them to rank at the top of the list.
In addition, we can observe that the concerns have become more heterogeneous over the years.
Previously, there would be two or three main problems mentioned by the majority of respondents.
Today, the popularity of these “main concerns” has dwindled, and many “minor” worries have been added instead.
One reason for this kind of fragmentation could be the decreasing significance of the mass and leading media.
There were times when the main edition of the daily news program Tagesschau reached around one million people each day.
Only 600,000 viewers watch the program now – although the population has also grown during that time.
What will the next 40 years bring?
Highly relevant issues will certainly be of concern in the future, too.
They will be joined by other (new) issues with acute need for political action (trending topics):
The educational system?
Transportation?
After the Worry Barometer ’s first 40 years, it can be said that the original goal has more than been achieved.
The survey has come to be seen as the barometer for the political sensitivities of Swiss citizens, and we can no longer do without it – not even in the lobby in Berne.
59 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016
Trend:
coexistence, in percent Trend:
environmental protection and mobility, in percent
1 Youth unemployment/unemployment 45 (– 11) 2 Foreigners 36 (– 7) One quarter of the population mentions youth unemployment (25 percent, – 1 pp) and general unemployment (26 percent, – 15 pp), respectively, as one of the top five concerns; 6 percent even list both worries.
3 AHV/retirement provision 28 (– 10) 4 Refugees/asylum systemn 26 (– 9) 5 EU/Bilateral treaties 22 (– 2) 6 Health care/health insurance 21 (– 1) 7 Euro crisis/euro exchange rate 19 (– 5) 8 New poverty 16 (+ 1)
9 Personal safety 15 (– 2) 4 2011 Refugees/asylum seekers Racism/xenophobia
9 Transportation/NEAT 15 (+ 7) 11 Wages 14 (+ 4) 11 Terrorism/extremism 14 (+ 4) 13 Environmental protection 13 (– 2) 2016 26 12
1 — Worry Barometer
Unemployment, Foreigners, Retirement Provision
“Out of all of the cards, please choose those five that you personally consider to be Switzerland ’s most significant problems,” in percent 2016 2015
14 Racism/xenophobia 12 (+ 2) 14 Inflation/rising prices 12 (+ 1) 16 15 8 2011
16 Social security 11 (– 1) Environmental protection (Nuclear) energy Transportation issues
16 Banking crisis 11 (+ 2) 16 Coexistence in Switzerland 11 (+ 4)
Switzerland Is Confident
Analysis 2016 — The main concerns seem less threatening, confidence in institutions has increased and the economic situation is considered positive.
The Worry Barometer of Credit Suisse shows that optimism is growing in Switzerland.
Unemployment, foreigners, retirement provision – the top three concerns of the Swiss have stayed the same in recent years.
And yet, the trend has changed somewhat.
Those three concerns seem to have lost some of their threatening character (see Figure 1).
In 2003, 63 percent of those surveyed saw unemployment as a major problem.
Last year it was 56 percent, and now the number is at just 45 percent.
The same trend applies to retirement provision.
That issue worried 59 percent of the population in 2003.
Last year it declined to 38 percent, and has dropped to 28 percent today.
By contrast, concerns about foreigners have risen almost continuously since 2003 from 18 percent to 43 percent last year.
Now results are showing a significant decline by 7 percentage points (pp).
At the same time, the number of respondents citing refugees
60 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016 and asylum-seekers as a top concern has declined by 9 pp to 26 percent.
This development was not necessarily expected.
On the one hand, this can be interpreted as praise for the political system and the institutions involved; on the other hand, the number of asylum applications is expected to be declined compared to 2015 – however, not in comparison to previous years.
The decline of these top concerns makes room for other worries, but no single problem has leapt up the scale.
We would most likely have expected this effect with terrorism concerns due to the numerous attacks in neighboring countries.
But at 14 percent (+ 4 pp), this number is far below the level in 2001 (27 percent).
Transportation-related problems have increased somewhat more significantly (15 percent, +7 pp).
Perhaps the festive opening of the Gotthard Base Tunnel called greater public attention to other transportation issues.
Wages have crept back into the spotlight somewhat (14 percent, +4 pp), while the very slight increase in concerns surrounding new poverty (16 percent, +1 pp) may have to do with the overall positive impression of the economic situation.
Concerns about coexistence in Switzerland have also increased (11 percent, +4 pp).
Promoting Education and Solidarity How should politicians react to the broad range of worries?
What should they focus on?
The familiar main concerns also rise to the top when it comes to naming the most urgent problem that should be resolved first.
Old age and survivors’insurance (AHV), immigration issues and unemployment were cited as the number one problem by 8 percent of voters, while 6 percent choose asylum and refugee problems as well as youth unemployment as the top issue.
However, if you ask people how they rate certain current political objectives, other topics also take on great importance.
This applies in particular to promoting education (93 percent call this very or somewhat important) as well as reducing greenhouse gas emissions (86 percent say this is very or somewhat important).
The Government and Economy Rarely Fail People in Switzerland have great confidence in their institutions.
The country ’s strong political and economic stability may be the reason.
Other arguments include 2 — Economic circumstances
Things Are Better Than Ever
“How would you describe your personal economic circumstances at the moment?
Are they …”
, in percent Very good Good Fair (other values excluded)
Switzerland in 10 Years’Time
What will Switzerland ’s biggest problems be in 10 years’time?
1 Unemployment 2 AHV/retirement provision 3 Foreigners 4 Refugees 5 EU/bilateral agreements 6 Euro crisis/euro exchange rate 7 Personal safety 8 New poverty 9 Terrorism/extremism 10 Health care/health insurance Switzerland is a stronghold of stability, even with regard to its problems.
Ten years from now, people will still have to deal with the same top concerns:
unemployment, retirement provision, issues with foreigners.
Those surveyed believe that personal safety will be more of a concern than it is now, and a significantly higher number of voters than in previous years anticipate problems with terrorism and extremism to worsen.
With regard to Switzerland ’s future relationship with the European Union, 81 percent of voters now support promoting bilateral agreements as a top or second priority (+ 21 pp), while only 19 percent believe they should be terminated.
10 percent could imagine joining the EU, while exactly 50 percent could contemplate joining the EEA.
Many Swiss people (40 percent) chose not to answer or could not decide on an option.
A new high of 68 percent of Swiss people rate their economic circumstances as good or very good.
2016 minimal corruption, a functioning administration and comparisons with other countries where things do not run as well.
A clear majority of voters (60 percent) attest that both the government and economy rarely fail in key areas.
These two numbers have never been so high.
In 2003, almost the same number of people believed that the government (53 percent) and the economy (57 percent) failed often.
Institutions that the Swiss previously viewed with skepticism primarily benefited from the increased confidence, such as political parties (55 percent, +9 pp), which a mere 29 percent of the population on average expressed confidence in over the last 20 years.
This has led to a general coalescing at a very high level (see Figure 3).
Within one year, the difference between the first and last place in the confidence ranking declined from 30 to 12 percentage points.
The top group of institutions trusted by 60 percent of the Swiss population includes the Federal Supreme Court and police as well as the Federal Council and Council of States, as has been the case for years.
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) and non-governmental organizations (NGO) have joined those ranks, although two years ago the latter of those only earned the confidence of 47 percent of people surveyed.
Employee and employer organizations
25 55 13
61 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016 are also enjoying significant confidence growth (61 percent, +14 pp and 53 percent, +15 pp respectively).
Their assessments varied widely in recent years, and now the trend is moving upward again.
The European Union joins the winners as well (54 percent, +12 pp, see also the box on page 61).
Have People Digested the Franc Shock?
Swiss people have never before assessed their own economic situation as positively as this year.
More than two thirds of the population rate it as good or even very good (see Figure 2), and optimism for the future is running high, while 92 percent (+ 6 pp) assume that they will be equally well off next year or in even better circumstances.
The general economic situation receives a similar evaluation.
The Swiss franc shock appears to be in the past, as 81 percent (+ 10 pp) of those surveyed believe that the economy has stayed the same or improved over the last twelve months, while 63 percent (+ 11 pp) assume that the economic situation in the coming year will remain more or less constant, and 22 percent (+ 2 pp) expect an economic improvement.
The majority of Swiss people have a positive view of the future.
(schi)
3 — Confidence in institutions
What We Believe In
“How much personal confidence do you have in the following institutions?”
(Confidence:
minimum 5 points on a scale of 1 to 7), in percent 2016 2015
1 Federal Supreme Court 65 (– 3) 2 Council of States 62 (+ 7) 2 Police 62 (+ 5) 4 Federal Council 61 (– 2) 4 Non-governmental organizations (NGO) 61 (+ 14) 4 Employee organizations 61 (+ 14) 7 Swiss National Bank (SNB) 60 (+ 8) 8 Government services 59 (+ 10) 8 Television 59 (+ 9) 8 Army 59 (+ 8) 11 Radio 58 (+ 6) 11 Paid newspapers 58 (+ 7) 13 National Council 57 (0) 13 Free newspapers 57 (+ 11) 13 Banks 57 (0) 16 Political parties 55 (+ 9) 16 Internet 55 (+ 7)
THE SURVEY On behalf of and in cooperation with Credit Suisse, the research institute gfs.
bern conducted a representative survey among 1010 eligible voters in Switzerland from July 4 to July 23, 2016.
The statistical sampling error is ± 3.2 percentage points.
The scientific evaluation in the two studies “Wachsender Optimismus – grösste Sorgen weniger virulent” (“Growing Optimism – Large Concerns Are Less Virulent,” Credit Suisse Worry Barometer 2016) and “Eine optimistische Schweiz dank Sicherheit und Freiheit” (“An Optimistic Switzerland, Thanks to Security and Freedom,” Credit Suisse Identity Barometer 2016) was conducted by a project team from gfs.
bern.
The findings were written up for Bulletin by Andreas Schiendorfer (schi).
Illustrations by Alexandra Compain-Tissier.
↓ The full survey and other articles are available for download at:
www.credit-suisse.com/worrybarometer
62 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016
“Baden-Württemberg is just as important to us as China is”
A voice from the business community — The people of Switzerland are right to attach highest priority to economic growth, says Peter Grünenfelder, director of Avenir Suisse.
Interview:
Simon Brunner
For many years, respondents to the Credit Suisse Worry Barometer survey have cited unemployment as their top concern.
Why is that?
The Swiss have a strong work ethic.
This is evident from the number of hours they work each year – in Switzerland, people work 220 hours more than in Germany and 110 more than in France.
Their work ethic is also reflected in their clear rejection of a 2012 initiative calling for six weeks of vacation.
So the overwhelming majority of people attach great importance to avoiding unemployment, for both financial and social reasons.
However, since an increasing share of unemployment is due to structural factors and tends to be unrelated to the overall economy, joblessness is a topic of constant concern in Swiss society.
When respondents were asked to name the country ’s top priority, “economic growth” was mentioned most often, followed by “Old Age and Survivors’Insurance (AHV)” and “family/jobs.”
How do you explain those responses?
Economic growth is a major factor in ensuring and increasing everyone ’s prosperity.
It also helps achieve other political goals, such as funding AHV and combating (youth) unemployment.
The global economic situation is in flux, not least because of Brexit as well as uncertainty about the future direction of US monetary policy.
In Switzerland, too, it is not yet clear how political decisions will affect the economy; the implementation of the mass immigration initiative will be one factor in this context.
I therefore agree that economic
Peter Grünenfelder, 49, was named director of the think tank Avenir Suisse in April 2016.
Prior to that time, he served as government chancellor for the canton of Aargau.
He holds a PhD in economics from the Graduate School of Business, Economics, Law and Social Sciences at the University of St. Gallen and is a member of the FDP.
growth should be our highest priority.
We need to focus particularly on boosting the productivity of the domestic economy, which is relatively weak.
Sixty-eight percent of Swiss people – more than ever before – describe their own economic situations as very good or good.
How is this possible at a time when the key economic indicators are less than ideal?
The OECD and SECO are predicting growth of 1.7 and 1.8 percent, respectively, for 2017, which is in the average range for the past twenty years.
Moreover, real wages have increased, thanks to low and even negative rates of inflation in recent years.
So Swiss households can afford to purchase more, or they have more money left over at the end of the month.
When asked to describe Switzerland ’s economy, relative to those of other countries, more people than ever before chose the response “quite good” or even “very good.”
Is there a danger that the Swiss fail to recognize how dependent our economy is on the countries around us?
The prosperity of each Swiss citizen depends in large measure on our economic ties to other countries – 70 centimes of every Swiss franc we earn can be attributed to those ties.
It is crucial to remember that.
In terms of trade volume, Baden-Württemberg is as important to us as China is, and Tyrol is as important as Canada.
We must do everything in our power to prevent the erection of new borders – political as well as mental – because they would jeopardize our economic welfare.
Asked to name Switzerland ’s strengths, since 2010 people have been mentioning the financial center more and more often.
Seventy-seven percent say that they are very or quite proud of it.
Has the reputation of the banks and insurance compa- nies recovered from the financial crisis?
Switzerland ’s financial industry is a flagship sector and exemplifies the international approach needed for our country ’s continued success and expansion as a business location.
I should also note that certain difficult and complex issues, such as our tax dispute with the United States, have been resolved in a professional way, and this has once again boosted confidence in the industry.
63 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016
Where do you see the greatest threat to the successful Swiss model?
I worry about a trend toward isolation and “growth fatigue.”
Switzerland is dependent on sound economic relations with other countries.
This applies not only to the exchange of goods, but also to the movements of workers.
If we jeopardize our positive relationships with the EU, by far our most important economic partner, this will have a direct impact on our country’s prosperity.
Since the bilateral agreements took effect, per-capita income in Switzerland has increased each year by between 0.5 and 1 percent.
That adds up to 50,000 francs in additional income for each individual since 2002.
In other words, the earnings of every Swiss citizen have grown by nearly four-fifths of a typical annual salary.
With regard to growth fatigue:
With all of the criticism of economic growth, we often forget how essential growth is to the functioning of our economic system and our society.
We need growth to finance our social welfare systems.
Technological advances also generate growth – and surely few of us would want to do without such advances, however we may feel about economic growth in general.
We therefore need to continue to remind people of certain economic truths.
“I ’m a member of the Swiss People ’s Party (SVP), but I ’m also a European”
A voice from the political arena — Jürg Stahl, soon to be the highest-ranking Swiss official, talks about his worries, Switzerland ’s relationship with Europe and his wish for his year as president of the National Council:
“We should all calm down.”
The Swiss people are worried about unemployment, foreigners and the pension system.
What do you, personally, see as the country ’s most pressing problems?
I would rank them in the same order.
The fact that unemployment is at the top of the list tells me that people recognize the importance of a strong, stable economy in driving Switzerland ’s prosperity.
Personally, I view pension reform as our greatest challenge.
Interview:
Simon Brunner and Oliver Heer
An expanded version of this interview, including additional questions about free trade and the financial center, can be found at credit-suisse.
com/gruenenfelder.
Worries about foreigners, as well as about refugees and the issue of asylum, seem to have declined – has the situation stabilized?
If these two topics were combined into one, it would rank at the top, even adjusting for the fact that many respondents mentioned both.
But that decline in concern is obviously a good thing.
It means that politicians are taking this issue more seriously.
In general, the feeling seems to be that Berne is n’t doing such a bad job; in most areas, people are less worried than they were.
Trust in the Federal Council, the National Council and the Council of States is very high.
Particularly in rural areas, a large share of respondents (41 percent) still say that the issue of foreigners is a major concern, far more than in the cities (33 percent) and densely populated areas (35 percent).
Why is that?
Jürg Stahl, 48, has been a member of the National Council (SVP, Zurich) since 1999 and will assume its presidency in 2016/2017.
Trained as a druggist, he operated his own business in Winterthur.
Since 2004, he has been a member of the Executive Board of the insurance company Groupe Mutuel.
He holds the military rank of major.
Stahl lives with his wife and daughter in Brütten in the canton of Zurich.
I lived in a city, Winterthur, for 40 years.
In my elementary school class, there were ten Italians, two Turks and a girl from the former Yugoslavia, along with just seven Swiss children.
Foreign cultures are nothing unusual for me.
For the past eight years I have been living in a very rural area, in Brütten, a village of 1,900 people in the canton of Zurich.
If we have five asylum seekers, it is noticed
64 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016 immediately.
People respond differently than in the cities.
We are shaped by our immediate environments – that ’s just how people are.
There has been talk recently of” two Switzerlands “– one rural, the other urban.
Is that how you see it?
Depending on the phase of the moon, there might be a Rösti gap, a polenta gap, a gap between rich and poor, men and women, city and country – I think these are just passing fads.
Of course, we all identify with our own patch of land and sometimes get angry with other people, or envy them.
But competition is healthy; diversity is what Switzerland is all about.
And when our national team wins, all of us are happy.
Contrary to expectations, only 14 percent of respondents named terrorism as one of their major concerns.
How do you explain that?
After the 9/11 terror attacks, the share of respondents who expressed concern about terrorism jumped from 1 to 27 percent.
I do n’t want to minimize the problem, but I would say that people seem to feel more secure in Switzerland.
When asked what kind of relationship Switzerland should have with the EU in the future, 65 percent of respondents said that they would like to see the bilateral agreements continue.
Last year it was only 47 percent.
What do you think that means?
What I notice most of all is that only 2 percent name joining the EU as a top priority.
And I ’m very happy about that!
Right now there is a lot of talk about whether the mass immigration initiative is compatible with our bilateral agreements – but although I ’m a member of the Swiss People ’s Party, I ’m also a European.
We need to clarify our relationships with our neighbors, no question.
This is how I interpret these responses:
People want politicians to overcome their differences and get to work on this issue.
I think that ’s a good thing.
The survey shows over and over again how much the respondents value Switzerland, how proud they are of it, and that they believe that it is better than other countries.
Are the people of Switzerland entirely too enamored with themselves?
That was my first thought when I looked at the results.
But the respondents are right:
Our economy is doing well.
We are world champions when it comes to innovation.
The bottom line is that none of the countries around us exudes such a sense of security.
And this state of affairs was n’t just handed to us on a platter; we had to work for it.
To what extent is” Swissness “a fad?
When I was in school, we used to attach stickers from Bravo magazine to our denim jackets.
Today it ’s Swiss pins – and that ’s no doubt a fad as well.
As a sports fan, I ’m convinced that right now the idea of “Swissness” also has something to do with the national football team.
My generation had to wait for 26 years before the national team qualified for a major tournament.
People just identify more closely with a team that is playing in an international tournament.
Many of my childhood friends eventually became fans of Holland, Argentina or Italy.
You ’re known to be a football expert – do you still keep albums with stickers of football players?
I ’ve filled every single Panini album since the 1974 World Cup.
This year, at the time of the European Championships, I decided that sticker albums were n’t a fitting pastime for a vice president, let alone the president, of the Swiss National Council.
So for the first time I refrained from buying one.
One last question:
What are your plans for 2017, when you take office as president of the National Council, becoming the highest-ranking Swiss official?
I ’m one of those “unspectacular politicians” and proud of it.
When my alarm rings in the morning, I get up and set out to do a good job.
Next year will be no different.
I would say two things:
First, life needs to be simpler again.
There are too many laws and regulations.
Second, we ’re moving from being a trusting society to one plagued by suspicion – I do n’t like that.
I would advise the people of Switzerland to start trusting one another again.
And we should all calm down.
Photo:
Samuel Golay/Ti - Press/Keystone
65 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016
Secure, Peaceful, Neutral
Analysis 2016 — A high level of satisfaction with the country, a great deal of national pride and optimism – is everything going well in Switzerland?
Swiss people are extraordinarily satisfied with their country.
Currently, 89 percent of voters are very proud, or at least somewhat proud, of the Confederation.
Although that is five percentage points (pp) lower than the record set in 2015, it reflects the average of the last five years and should therefore be weighted higher because there are no significant differences between sympathizers of different parties or residents of the country ’s different regions.
National pride is not the only area of agreement for many of those surveyed.
There was also a broad consensus on the openly formulated question of which three things define Switzerland (see Figure 1).
Without being given a list of options to choose from, in recent years Swiss people almost always listed “Security and peace,” “Neutrality” and “Scenery” as the main characteristics of Switzerland.
This time 21 percent (+ 2 pp) of the population chose security and peace as Switzerland ’s top characteristic, 15 percent (– 17 pp) chose neutrality, which was the topic of intense discussion during the anniversary year of the Battle of Marignano, while 14 percent (+ 1 pp) chose the country ’s scenery.
All of these aspects are fundamental for the understanding of Switzerland as “Home” (10 percent), a term that those surveyed obviously prefer using compared to “Patriotism” (5 percent).
As symbols of an intact economy, the “Social state” (11 percent), based on solidarity, as well as “Industry” (10 percent) contribute to preserving domestic security and
Quality awareness 5 (– 5) Security, peace 21 (+ 2)
Neutrality 15 (– 17) Sense of order 5 (– 5)
Scenery 14 (+ 1) Patriotism 5 (± 0)
1 — Identity
The Switzerland of the Swiss
“Please name three things that symbolize Switzerland for you personally,” in percent 2016 2015
Solidarity, social state 11 (+ 2) Chocolate 5 (– 1) Freedom, freedom of opinion 10 (+ 2) Cultural diversity 5 (+ 2) Direct and participatory democracy 10 (+ 5) Dishonest politicians 5 (+ 3) Industry 10 (+ 4) Watchmaking 5 (+ 1) Home, homeland 10 (± 0) School system 9 (– 1) Democracy 7 (– 1) Ownership 6 (+ 6) Autonomy, independence 6 (+ 1)
Ownership and wealth are also part of Switzerland, but are less important than the ideal values.
Wealth 6 (– 1)
66 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016 2 — Belonging
Who the Country Is Especially Important To
“Which geographic units do you feel you primarily belong to (first and second), Switzerland, language region, the canton of residence, community, Europe or the world?”
(Figure:
Switzerland, 1s t choice, average 2006 – 2016), in percent more than 30 percent 24 – 30 percent less than 24 percent no response
GE 27 VD 25 NE 30 FR 31 JU 34 VS 26 BS 24 SO 16 BE 27 BL 20 AG 24 LU 23 OW 31 NW 25 SH 42 ZH 38 ZG 18
3 — Switzerland ’s strengths:
a comparison over time
We Are Neutral
SZ 24 UR 28 TI 23 TG 28
“Out of all of the cards, please choose those five that you personally consider to be Switzerland's most significant strengths,” in percent
Neutrality 36
Swiss quality 33
Education 30
Order and cleanliness 24
Participatory democracy 24
Health care 24
Pharmaceutical industry 24
Strong economy 24
Peace 23
Stability* 22
* not asked in 2006
GL SG 22 GR 23 AI/AR 29
2006 Neutrality 45
Swiss quality 42
Coexistence of cultures 36
Participatory democracy 35
Peace 35
Financial center 28
Order and cleanliness 25
Education 23
Personal freedoms 23
Leisure time/tourism 22 peace.
“Freedom of opinion” and the “Participatory democracy” (10 percent) are equally important to the Swiss.
However, these two are not mentioned as often, in either short or long-term comparisons, possibly because they serve very personal fulfillment objectives as well as the country ’s interests.
By contrast, Switzerland ’s various “cliché characteristics” such as “Wealth,” “Precision,” “Chocolate” and “Watchmaking” only receive 5 percent to 6 percent of the vote as a chief characteristic of the country.
Three Cardinal Strengths There is a broad consensus among voters regarding Switzerland ’s greatest strengths.
In recent years, “Neutrality” (36 percent), “Swiss quality” (33 percent) and “Education” (30 percent) received the most mentions as one of the top five strengths.
While neutrality has seen a degree of fluctuation at a high level, peaking in 2008 (50 percent), the trends of the other top two strengths were more linear.
After a constant increase to record levels in 2013 (46 percent), education now ranks third because fewer people have cited it as a strength for the past three years in a row.
Perhaps that is why 93 percent of Swiss people consider promoting education an important political objective (see page 61).
“Quality” was also mentioned less often in the years 2012 through 2014.
However, although this has changed recently, the results are still far below the peak seen in the years 2011/2012 (50 percent).
Agreement remains consistently high on the strengths “Order and cleanliness” (24 percent), “Participatory democracy” (24 percent) and “Peace” (23 percent), with the latter two experiencing a slight downward trend (each scored 35 percent in 2006).
The negative trend in “Coexistence of cultures” is even more pronounced – numbers here have decreased by half from 36 percent to 18 percent over the same period.
By contrast, the “Pharmaceutical industry” (from 12 percent to 24 percent) and “Health care” (from 15 percent to 24 percent) enjoyed positive trends.
Switzerland as a “Financial center” reached 21 percent, after falling below 20 percent between 2009 and 2014.
One key question in Credit Suisse ’s Worry Barometer is which geographic unit respondents feel that they belong to, first and foremost.
It appears that things are leveling off in this regard nationwide,
67 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Analysis 2016 since up until 2011 “Community” was the clear leader, with Switzerland as a whole taking the lead after that time.
Now, for the first time, the canton of residence has taken the lead (28 percent, +4 pp), but only slightly ahead of Switzerland (25 percent, – 1 pp), the community (22 percent, +3 pp) and the language region (18 percent, – 6 pp).
The number of Swiss people who primarily identify themselves with Europe or the world – after peaking in 2013 (12 percent) – has declined again to 7 percent (0 pp).
Despite the leveling off that was determined across Switzerland as a whole, there are large regional differences (see Figure 2).
Egotism and New Poverty The fundamentally optimistic attitude expressed in this year ’s survey in many areas is also reflected in the outlook for the future (see Figure 4).
Regarding the question on whether the situation will improve in selected areas, the numbers have doubled over the last ten years in some cases.
Optimism is especially high with “Coexistence of cultures,” which only one-eighth of the population currently considers a strength, with more than three-quarters of voters expecting a more or less distinct improvement.
Highly Regarded by Other Countries
52 percent (+ 12 pp) of Swiss people believe that Switzerland ’s reputation abroad has improved over the last 12 months.
Accordingly, more voters than ever before are convinced that Switzerland ’s international image is very good, or at least fairly good (92 percent, +19 pp).
This self-confidence may be based on the economic comparison in which 97 percent (+ 4 pp) see advantages for Switzerland in contrast to other countries.
Although 44 percent (+/– 0) of voters believe that Swiss politicians’demeanor abroad is fairly or very aggressive, 23 percent (+ 5 pp) think they should be much more aggressive in the future.
Another 48 percent (+ 2 pp) would like to see fairly aggressive behavior at least.
These percentages are higher than in 2015, but not as high as the record levels of 2014, when almost 80 percent of those surveyed wanted to see a more aggressive demeanor.
16 Switzerland ’s reputation abroad, in percent 2009 very good 2016 38
Well over two-thirds also anticipate improvement in cooperation among the major parties and progress on environmental issues as well.
Estimations of the spread of poverty among those surveyed are noteworthy.
A majority here fear that the situation is worsening.
This should be taken seriously, all the more so since when asked about threats to Switzerland ’s identity, 65 percent of voters answered egotism, which is almost as many as cited problems with the EU (68 percent) and immigration (77 percent).
In other words, optimism is fine, but resting on our laurels is not an option.
(schi)
4 — Switzerland in 10 years
Cohesiveness Will Improve
“When you think about Switzerland in 10 years:
Do you think Switzerland will be doing much better, somewhat better, somewhat worse or much worse in the following areas?”
, in percent much better better do n’t know/no answer somewhat worse worse
Cohesiveness of language regions
Environment/ecology
A majority fears that the age structure will continue to worsen and the spread of poverty will increase.
Cooperation among the major political parties
Coexistence with foreigners
Age structure of society
Spread of poverty
20
24
36
18
68 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Future
The Concerns of Tomorrow
The next 40 years — What will shape our lives?
A futurologist ventures a prediction
By Georges T. Roos
When I, in my role as a futurologist, outline the concerns of tomorrow, people might get the impression that the future is gloomy.
This is neither my intention nor my expectation.
I do not see myself as either an optimist or a pessimist, but rather as a “possibilist” who recognizes challenges, along with the opportunities and risks that they represent.
There will be crises in the future.
But crises represent a crossroads, similar to what we see over the course of an illness.
The illness can accelerate, or it can turn around and begin to heal.
If the Swiss actually tackle the following issues, the country will, in the best case scenario, find the solutions to its future challenges.
In the Next 10 Years We live in an unusual time:
Savers are punished, while those who go into debt reap benefits.
Central banks have been trying to use negative interest rates to induce banks and investors to lend more, which they would do if they found the risks justifiable.
Over the next 10 years, central banks will look for a way out of this paradoxical situation.
Will this result in the collapse of the euro?
Will the Swiss franc go through the roof?
Will there be high inflation?
Experts today have become lost in a thicket of technical details.
Hardly anyone is asking the obvious questions, but they will need to be answered.
Every day, thousands of people cross the Mediterranean in unseaworthy boats, fleeing war, poverty, despotism and a sense of hopelessness.
They are seeking asylum in a Europe that is at a loss as to what it should do.
And I see no signs of this crisis resolving itself.
Taking in and integrating hundreds of thousands of people into our social systems and labor markets will shape the next several years.
Georges T. Roos, 53, is an independent futurologist in Lucerne.
For nearly 20 years, he has analyzed the relevant megatrends, developed future scenarios, and helped companies implement early detection processes.
In 10 to 20 Years In the pension system, we have still to face the real challenges.
In a little more than a decade, the last members of the Baby Boom generation will reach the age of retirement and begin collecting AHV pension payments.
The ratio of pension recipients to workers has become perilously high.
There is now one retired person for every two working-age adults (in 1960, the ratio was 1:
6).
It might be possible to finance everything.
But that does not mean the solution is always fair.
The plague ‒ the “Black Death” ‒ ravaged Europe in the 14th century, killing a third of the population.
Today, we have antibiotics that can cure the plague, which has still not been eradicated entirely, provided they are applied early enough.
But what will happen in the future if a virus comes along that is resistant to antibiotics?
Experts are already warning of this threat.
In a globally connected world, pandemics have become more likely.
In 20 to 30 Years On the whole, however, I do not expect more diseases in the future, but rather significantly better medicine.
Scientists managed to sequence the human genome several years ago.
Now we need to understand our genes better.
It is like having a dictionary with the definitions missing.
Things will be different in 20 to 30 years.
Much more efficient treatments will be possible, with personalized medicines and the ability to grow body parts in a bioreactor using our own genetic material.
Some visionaries already claim that they will soon be able to heal the “disease of age.”
But what should be permitted?
What should be financed through the combined community of health insurance plans?
Should we have two classes of medicine?
Health care will likely become more important in the Worry Barometer not in spite of, but rather precisely because of the expected progress in medicine.
Medical progress goes hand in hand with the development of artificial intelligence.
Machines capable of learning will shake up the workplace over the next several years, in what is being called the fourth Industrial Revolution.
This process of automation will likely reach deep into the service sector.
Intelligent machines will serve as the accountants, clerks, controllers and land surveyors of the future.
Collaborative robots will work with nursing staff to care for the elderly and the sick.
If the prediction in an Oxford University study is correct ‒ that nearly 50 percent of all jobs today will be automated in 20 years ‒ then concerns about unemployment are more justified
In 30 to 40 Years At some point, artificial intelligence will be more intelligent than people, or even more intelligent than humanity as a whole.
Technology guru and futurist Ray Kurzweil talks about singularity:
This will be achieved when intelligent machines are able to build even more intelligent machines – without the involvement of human beings in any way.
Will these super-intelligent beings conduct an analysis
Playing Our Cards Right
The future of the workplace — An aging society is burdening our social welfare system, digitalization is continuing, a lack of skilled workers is becoming the new normal:
The world of work is undergoing radical changes.
But Switzerland is in a favorable position.
By Nicole Burth Tschudi
If Africa manages to find its footing, it will be a force to be reckoned with.
of the situation and conclude that the biggest problem facing the planet is humanity?
I do not believe that this will occur – but I do believe it is humanity ’s responsibility to understand how and to what extent it should rely on artificial intelligence systems.
The future structure of globalization could also once again become increasingly important in the Worry Barometer – albeit in a surprising form.
It is conceivable that in 30 or 40 years Africa will supplant Asia and the US as the engine of the global economy.
Of all the continents, Africa has the most favorable demographic structure for the future.
Not only does it have a high percentage of young people, they are also increasingly well educated.
And it has natural resources.
If Africa manages to find its footing, it will be a force to be reckoned with.
There is no denying that Switzerland ’s labor market is experiencing a period of upheaval that exceeds anything we have seen in generations.
Economic conditions have rarely been more challenging.
A strong Swiss franc is causing headaches for the export sector.
Historically low interest rates are endangering retirement capital.
With the acceptance of the mass immigration initiative, an already difficult situation has become even more challenging.
Even more than the strong franc, restrictions on hiring qualified foreign workers represent a serious longterm problem for Switzerland ’s most important industries.
Without foreign workers, the Swiss economy will contract – something that is happening in any event, owing to demographic trends.
Switzerland ’s baby boomers will reach retirement age between 2020 and 2035.
The share of over- 65-year-olds will increase by 84 percent.
According to the Swiss Federal Statistical Office (SFSO), 2.7 million people over age 65 will be living in Switzerland in 2045.
That figure was only 1.5 million at the end of 2014.
Beginning in 2017, more people will retire each year than reach working age.
According to a study conducted by the University of Basel, by 2030 an additional 500,000 workers will be needed to maintain our current two-percent level of economic growth.
By 2060, we will have a gap of between 800,000 and 1.4 million workers.
Given these demographic trends, economists believe that meeting the demand for labor domestically will be impossible, even if the labor force participation rate were to increase
Nicole Burth Tschudi, 44, is the CEO of Adecco Switzerland.
She studied economics at the University of Zurich and is a Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA).
dramatically.
For the past ten years, it has still been possible to compensate for a lack of skilled workers in Switzerland by recruiting workers abroad.
However, the supply of workers from Germany – Switzerland ’s preferred source – is gradually running dry.
By 2017, more people are expected to be returning to Germany than will be immigrating to Switzerland.
So Switzerland will have to attract more qualified workers outside of the German-speaking countries and even outside of the EU.
Fundamentally Rethinking Our Approach The fact is that we need a business- friendly immigration policy.
We need to take an unbureaucratic approach to implementing the mass immigration initiative.
It wo n’t
70 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016 Future be helpful to impose industry-specific limitations; instead, we should focus on certain occupational groups.
The IT sector is not the only one looking for computer scientists, for example; banks and insurance companies need them as well.
It is rarely possible to hire highly qualified job candidates immediately – the process of recruiting them takes time and money.
And when a company lures a worker away from a competitor, that creates a vacancy elsewhere.
Entrepreneurs, too, need to rethink their approach.
They need to attract, support and retain women, career changers, older employees and talented young people – by offering innovative and flexible workplace models like job sharing, home office work, so-called “career arc” programs that allow older workers to gradually relinquish some of their responsibilities, and part-time positions for mothers and fathers.
They need to develop and implement further training programs.
Companies should be diverse in terms of age, gender, and geographic and cultural background.
The Corporate Tax Reform III program was designed to stimulate the economy.
Switzerland is attracting high-tech companies in the pharmaceutical, medtech and biotech industries that employ experts from all over the world.
They are accustomed to putting together international project teams, and they are in constant search of talent.
For the third time, Switzerland has been ranked first in the Adecco Group ’s Global Talent Competitiveness Index, and it is well positioned to compete for the finest minds.
Talent migration is one of Switzerland ’s key advantages.
What needs to be done?
Switzerland ’s lack of skilled workers is concentrated primarily in the STEM fields (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and the health care sector.
By 2022, there will be a deficit of roughly 87,000 qualified workers in the field of information and communication technology.
According to the latest estimates from the University of Basel, new graduates will be able to fill approximately 34,000 of those positions.
If immigration rates remain at their present level, there will still be a deficit of 13,800 skilled workers in this sector in 2022.
The situation is even more serious in the field of health care.
Each year, we fall short by approximately 4,600 in training the people who will be needed to meet the demand in 2020.
What to do?
It is important to encourage interest in mathematics and technology, as well as to promote language skills, when children are still in elementary school or even preschool.
Professional development and retraining opportunities should be expanded.
These should be targeted particularly at low-skilled workers (roughly one-fifth of Switzerland ’s working population), only a third of whom pursue further
Sixty percent of young people will have a job that does n’t even exist today.
training.
In the education and health care sectors, women should be encouraged to enter the workforce as part-time workers or to increase their work hours.
Over the next few years, companies will undergo profound changes.
Jobs that require few skills, such as operating machinery, will be eliminated.
High-skilled jobs, for example in 3 D printing, are the wave of the future.
Well-known business consultant Roland Berger points out that while traditional industrial jobs will be lost, up to 10 million new jobs will be created in Western Europe – particularly in the service and IT sectors.
Digitalization and the fourth industrial revolution refer to the use of internet technologies for communications between human beings, machines and products.
Industry 4.0 technologies will spread rapidly over the next few years.
Digitalization will be an important tool for easing the effects of demographic change, and this represents an opportunity for Switzerland.
Work-Life Balance Increasingly Important Job loss and the threat of unemployment will take on a new significance in the coming decades.
Job security will be redefined, and work-life balance will become more important; people need to be able to recon- cile the demands of their career and family, job and personal life.
There will no longer be such a thing as a job for life – in contrast to the baby-boom era.
Sixty percent of the young people who will enter the workplace in 2025 will have a job that does n’t even exist today.
By 2030, according to futurologist Horst Opaschowski, one in two employees will no longer have a full-time position.
There will be fewer permanent jobs.
Rather than hiring regular employees, more companies will be contracting online with workers all over the world who happen to have time and are able to provide the best performance at the best price.
Day-to-day experience with computers, smartphones and the internet has a substantial impact on digital skills.
According to the consulting firm Accenture, such skills are particularly useful for women, as they permit them to use their time more efficiently and to be more productive.
Digitalization makes work more flexible, so that it no longer has to be performed at a specific time or place.
Twenty-five percent of jobs benefit from “hyperconnectivity,” or unlimited data traffic:
It no longer matters when or where you do your work.
A Key Factor:
Digital Skills Landing a permanent position requires independent thinking, social skills, persuasiveness, creativity, flexibility, an entrepreneurial spirit, openness to lifelong learning and the ability to adjust to new things.
In the coming years, digital skills will be a crucial career factor.
According to Accenture, 44 percent of rapidly growing companies are relying on temporary teams, and 86 percent are taking advantage of increased cooperation within the company to improve performance.
This results in better feedback, more ideas and innovations at every level.
Companies will need to put such ideas into practice in order to attract, support and retain women, older employees and talented young people, for example by offering further training programs and innovative job models.
Switzerland ’s labor market is facing major challenges.
But the country is in a good position to safeguard its prosperity in a digitalized world.
We need to play our cards right, however, if our labor market is to maintain its attractiveness and succeed in competing for the best minds.
71 Credit Suisse# worrybarometer# 2016
A Happy and Satisfied Country
The survey respondents are extremely proud of Switzerland, the evaluation of their own financial situation has never been better, and their confidence in Swiss institutions remains high.
Illustration:
Berto Martínez
Berto Martínez is an international illustrator from Barcelona.
72
INVESTING IN EDUCATION
In Latin America, Africa and Asia, 675,000 children can now access a quality education thanks to Credit Suisse’s support of Opportunity’s EduFinance initiatives.
Our partnership plays a formative role in empowering parents to send their children to school and enabling teachers to develop low-cost, high-quality learning environments.
By supporting access to critical financial services and training, Credit Suisse helps school owners like Regina Githinji, pictured below, give children a chance to break the cycle of poverty by obtaining a good education.
Regina founded the Revelation Ushindi School in the slums of Kenya with just three students.
Over the last nine years, she has used a series of Opportunity loans and training to install clean running water, purchase textbooks and food for the children, pay teacher’s salaries and maintain her rent payments on the now-large school property that serves 80 students.
Regina is one of 14 million Opportunity clients who are working their way out of poverty and, in doing so, are transforming their lives and the communities around them.
Discover more at opportunity.
org.
Suisse ’s CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
# 2016 With
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
3/2016
075360 E
Big interview with digital pioneer Sebastian Thrun Page 22
Digital World, Analog Life
Man and Machine – How We Change Each Other
DEGUSSA:
THE SIMPLEST WAY TO INVEST IN PRECIOUS METALS.
Gold has been the strongest currency since 2001 B.
C.
and is therefore considered a solid long-term investment.
As a leading precious metals trader in Europe, and operating independently outside of the banking system, Degussa is able to offer you comprehensive advice in our Swiss branches in Zurich and Geneva.
Here, we can help you compile your personal investment portfolio with a wide selection of Degussa-branded gold bars which include a bank security number.
We also offer bullion coins as an alternative investment opportunity.
In addition, we have collectible coins and high carat precious metal gifts.
For safe storage, we offer state-of-the-art safe deposit box facilities protecting your assets 24/7.
Further information and online shop at:
DEGUSSA-GOLDHANDEL.
CH
Bleicherweg 41 · 8002 Zurich Telephone:
044 403 41 10 Quai du Mont-Blanc 5 · 1201 Geneva Telephone:
022 908 14 00
Focus on People ow is a time of great upheaval, in all areas of the economy and society.
New technologies are permanently changing the way we do business.
As digitalization transforms the economy sector by sector, traditional patterns of thinking are giving way to new opportunities.
Digitalization is n’t replacing people with machines.
Instead, it encourages us to focus on people.
“Technology gives us superhuman abilities,” says technology pioneer Sebastian Thrun (cover photo), senior advisor to the newly established fintech innovation factory “Credit Suisse Labs,” in the interview on page 22.
This Bulletin is devoted to the interplay between analog human beings and digital technologies.
The digital revolution represents an immense challenge for the Swiss economy.
But the outlook for mastering this challenge is bright.
21.9 percent of respondents to our SME survey say that their companies are already strongly or very strongly digitized (page 20).
Our research unit has investigated the effects of this development on the Swiss labor market (page 18)
Urs Rohner, Chairman of the Board of Directors, Credit Suisse Group AG
Bulletin has won gold in “Best of Content Marketing” (BCM), the most prestigious European competition for corporate communication.
Having received this honor three times, Bulletin will be inducted into the Hall of Fame next year.
Our Commitment to Lower Youth Unemployment.
Through the initiative to tackle youth unemployment, Credit Suisse has been committed to improving the opportunities for career starters in Switzerland since 2010.
More than 8,800 young adults have already received assistance from our partner organizations and from the bank.
Since April 1, 2015, these services have been supported by the legally autonomous “Check Your Chance” association and managed sustainably by the partner organizations.
credit-suisse.
com/youthunemployment
Contents
Space flights are going private, and you can now order satellites online.
– p.
30
4 At Our Service
We ’re still learning to use our digital instruments.
8 Revolution in 3 D
3 D printing will radically alter business models.
18 The End of Routine
Will digitalization turn up the pressure on SMEs in Switzerland?
20 Countering Locational Disadvantages The role of technology for Swiss SMEs.
22 Sebastian Thrun
A digital prophet on the modern era and the opportunities presented by technology.
28 Clouds, Shadows …
Nineteen terms you should know for the digital future.
32 Trial and Error
Visit to a school of the future in California.
40 Homo Digitalis
How machines are changing people.
42 “1 +1= 3”
Digitalization head Marco Abele explains how bank advisors and computers complement each other.
46 Racks of Lettuce
Vertical agriculture in Japan.
50 A Formula for Love
Can algorithms on dating websites really bring people together?
52 Letters to the Editor/Publishing Information Credit Suisse# youthbarometer# 2016
# 1 Politics Online The Internet makes politics more exciting.
Terrorism is a cause for concern.
— p.
55
# 2 Communications Digital is not the same as global:
the regional differences.
Online bullying as a new problem.
— p.
58
# Roundtable How do e-politics work?
A discussion with Flavia Kleiner (Operation Libero), Lukas Reimann (SVP) and Otfried Jarren (University of Zurich).
— p.
60
# 3 Trends and Media Mobile phones and apps are in, drugs and clubs are out.
— p.
65
# 4 Job, Finances and Career Home ownership and stocks instead of a savings account.
More mobile phone debt in Switzerland.
People want independence and a home office.
— p.
67
# Interview Researcher Sherry Turkle warns about being online too much and advocates regular breaks from smartphones for both parents and children.
— p.
69
OUR A T
IS DIGITIZATION TAKING OUR JOBS?
ARE ROBOTS TAKING OVER?
NOT SO FAST!
WE’RE STILL LEARNING TO USE OUR DIGITAL INSTRUMENTS.
BY WOLF LOTTER
S C ERVI E
Big things can sometimes happen in small spaces.
Take the suburb of Cologny, just outside Geneva.
With just over 5,500 residents on Lake Geneva ’s eastern shore, it is also home to the influential World Economic Forum (WEF).
The foundation is known far and wide for its annual meeting in Davos, the most influential forum for discussion about the global economy.
This annual get-together of the world ’s movers and shakers is organized from Cologny – and along with it, the agenda of billions of people worldwide.
In 2016, the central focus of the WEF meeting was the transformation from an industrial to an information society, a transition that will occupy us for decades to come.
With the Fourth Industrial Revolution, an age-old fantasy of humankind is becoming very real.
Heavy labor, boring jobs, monotonous work?
Machines will do the dirty work for us.
We ’ve got better things to do.
The Dream:
Information for All In the years after the Second World War, the first computers and electronic control systems touched off the Third Industrial Revolution.
Production and factories were automated on a massive scale.
Robots welded, soldered and drilled away with a speed and precision that their human coworkers could n’t approach.
Now digital technology is everywhere.
It ’s one of the main reasons why prosperity continues to grow, and not just in the old industrialized nations that are becoming information societies.
Four decades ago, Apple was launched.
Its young founders, Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, dreamed of giving everyone access to information technology that was once available only to large compa- nies and the military.
Apple has long since become an icon in the movement to bring computers to the masses, a precondition for the Internet.
These innovations led to much more than Google, Facebook and Snapchat.
By promoting and accelerating globalization, the Third Industrial Revolution enabled the tremendous rise of China and India, once among the world ’s poorest countries.
The computer is a blessing, pure and simple; its mere existence would be revolutionary enough.
And yet there ’s more to come.
The Machine Comes of Age The Fourth Industrial Revolution takes all of this one decisive step further.
Computers, robots and software have developed to the point that they not only support production, they take charge of it.
Artificial intelligence encourages a kind of super automation, allowing machines to organize, control, repair and adapt themselves.
Having shaped our lives and culture more than anything else in the past two hundred years, the machine is coming of age.
Digitization in the next, definitive industrial revolution will be impressive.
But how will it affect us?
Time to return to Cologny – or more precisely, to the Villa Diodati.
Two hundred years ago, the (first) industrial revolution was still young.
In England, its homeland, weavers armed with sledgehammers stormed factories where new machines wove cotton into cloth more quickly, cheaply and efficiently than ever before.
Named after their leader Ned Ludd, the machines’assailants inspired fear and awe.
Condemned by some as dangerous reactionaries who were halting the progress of the world, the Luddites were honored by others as heroes who stood up to the artificial power of machines.
Tales of Horror From the House on the Lake The young luminaries who came together at the Villa Diodati in Cologny during the summer of 1816 knew about the Luddites.
The large house on the lake was rented by the English poet George Byron, who spent the summer there with his friend Percy Shelley and Shelley ’s lover, Mary Godwin.
At the time, Shelley and Byron
In the evenings, the young artists told ghost stories.
Mary Godwin drew inspiration from the spirit of the age.
Her tale was about the machine, which many people saw as an artificial person – more on this later.
Work was drudgery that demanded energy.
Until this point, energy had been supplied mostly by people and animals.
The steam engine and new methods of organizing work changed all this.
Even today, many people secretly believe in the “ghost in the machine.”
In 1816, at the beginning of the industrial era, this belief was widespread.
Contemporaries described steam locomotives and other machines as “hissing” and “raging,” “snorting” and “unfettered” monsters.
As artificial beings, with a greater or lesser degree of intelligence.
Horrifying.
Arrogant.
And logical.
Since the Enlightenment, more and more people had taken their lives into their own hands, no longer content to settle for a fate that was predetermined by a higher power.
But now God was no longer the only creative force in the room.
The Creator ’s creations became his competition.
Humans began to produce artificial life, although it was n’t graceful and lovely, like Adam and Eve.
Instead, it was coarse, like a steam engine – or Frankenstein ’s monster.
Mary Godwin (now Mary Shelley) expanded her tale of horror from the summer of 1816, publishing it two years later as the novel “Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus.”
“Frankenstein” is a dystopia, or a negative utopia, of the machine age.
The moral of the story is that vengeance is terrible for those who presume to play God.
This was the position of many “critical intellectuals,” then and now.
That, too, is nothing new.
According to the ancient Greeks, Prometheus stole fire from the gods on Olympus and gave it to humans.
They were “enlightened,” gaining self-assurance and creativity.
But in return, Prometheus ’s relatives chained him to a rock, where eagles picked at his liver for the rest of time.
In the Bible, it was an apple that Eve picked for Adam.
Independent initiative became the fall of humankind.
From this point forward, humans had to provide for themselves and toil for survival.
We ’ve come a long way since then, although in some respects, we remain just as fearful as before.
Automation has achieved tremendous things in the past 200 years, but its reputation is still suspect.
The Price of Too Much Progress Human life expectancy is nearly three times what it was during Mary Shelley ’s lifetime.
In the year 2000, economic prosperity in Western Europe was 44 times greater than two centuries earlier.
Nevertheless, influential members of our society – particularly the middle classes and academic elites – still see Industry 4.0 as a grisly tale of horror.
If blue-collar and clerical workers were the ones to lose jobs in previous waves of automation, now even the highly educated are threatened by the “ghost in the machine.”
For three years, critics have cited a study by the researchers Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment.”
The notorious Frey-Osborne study predicts massive job losses with the introduction of new digital automation technologies.
Were these technologies to be introduced fully, around half of all jobs in the United States today would be in danger.
In Germany, where a similar study was conducted using Frey ’s and Osborne ’s methods, the figure was 59 percent.
There it is again – the Frankenstein effect, the price of too much progress.
As many as 86 percent of all office workers, basic service providers and salespeople wo n’t be needed any longer.
69 percent of machine operators, who can be replaced by self-learning systems, will lose their jobs.
Academics get off lightly, with only a 12 percent casualty rate.
New studies predict that business consultants, doctors and lawyers will also face fresh competition through smart machines.
Breathing Space for Better Things But is this really possible?
Yes, and it ’s not a bad thing.
What the researchers measured is the high degree of routine and normalized work that still prevails in our working world.
People are always repeating the same movements and performing the same tasks.
In digital information societies, however, value creation does n’t come from routine tasks or monotonous repetition, but rather from creative problem solving.
This is true for basic services as well as complex problems.
Human work will increasingly be liberated from monotonous activity.
We ’ll be left with tasks that require creativity, originality and independence.
Is this really so upsetting?
The first three industrial revolutions gradually liberated humanity from heavy physical labor.
The fourth wave will free us from monotonous routines, which machines can complete better and more efficiently than people.
We ’ll have breathing space for better things.
Finding good transitional solutions, for example, for those whose routine labor is no longer needed.
The discussion about Industry 4.0, artificial intelligence and the apparent dangers of automation has n’t encouraged smart robots so much as it has revealed an outmoded culture of work.
Working creatively is still considered sacrilege, even by those who do n’t otherwise justify their political motivations through religion.
Do we have to earn our bread by the sweat of our brow?
Would n’t we be better off leaving the drudgery to machines?
The emerging information society is becoming our new normal.
It ’s a chance to reflect on ourselves and our work – and on the role that work plays in our lives, in good times and bad.
The ghost in the machine is our friend.
We just have to listen closely.
It ’s calling us to leave bad work behind, so that we can develop good, humane kinds of work that better correspond to individual needs, wherever possible.
Digitization will help us, as long as we approach it calmly and without prejudice.
Machines are n’t stealing our jobs.
Of course, most 19th -century professions no longer exist – but on balance, there is much more work and prosperity than before.
Work and human activity are like a hydra, the many-headed creature from Greek mythology.
If one of its heads is cut off, two new ones grow back.
Sociologists like Manfred Füllsack from the University of Graz sum it up this way:
work creates work.
Human needs are endless.
We ’ll always think of something new – without the help of machines.
WORK CREATES WORK.
HUMAN NEEDS ARE ENDLESS.
Instead of talking about new artificial intelligence, it would be smarter for us to emphasize the natural intelligence that already exists.
To borrow the words of Immanuel Kant, we ought to have the courage to use our own reason.
This means not being afraid to tap the full potential of machines, including automation and smart production.
That ’s why machines are here.
We think and lead.
Machines finish the job.
This is indeed a revolution – not of machines, but of human creativity and self-awareness.
The information age offers more possibilities and a better future for most of us.
Does that sound like a tale of horror?
Only if we do n’t learn how to play the instrument that we ’ve created.
But if we do it right, it will be music to our ears.
Robots Do n't Think They ’re not up to the task, anyhow.
Robots ca n’t think; humans have a monopoly on intelligence, creativity and the ability to think independently.
No researcher has been able to crack the code of independent thought, even though we ’ve heard the promise many times.
This means that the machines and systems we create are only as smart as we make them.
The ghost in the machine ca n’t do anything that we ca n’t – after all, it ’s our creation.
All of the trendy discussions about artificial intelligence are leading us down the wrong path.
Wolf Lotter is an author and co-founder of the business magazine brand eins.
Photo:
Markus Burke
Revolution in 3 D
Complex human organs, entire houses or just a t-shirt:
3 D printing enables nearly any item to be produced almost anywhere.
This will radically transform value chains and business models.
By Daniel Ammann and Ulrich Kaiser (article)
MOTORCYCLE Airbus subsidiary APWorks has built an electric motorcycle that only weighs 35 kilograms.
The frame of the Light Rider is not made of welded tubes, but consists instead of a billion particles of a special aluminum alloy welded together layer by layer with a laser beam using a 3 D printer.
This is one of the groundbreaking benefits of the new technology:
It allows for complex forms that can only be made
Photo:
Chris Keulen
ARCHEOLOGY Only four masked helmets made by the West Germanic Batavi tribe have survived to the present day – and those that have are just fragments.
The Museum Het Valkhof in the Dutch city of Nijmegen has now used a scanner and 3 D printer to reconstruct a complete helmet for the first time.
The technology can be used to save cultural heritage.
Thanks to this technology, for example, the triumphal arches in
Photo:
Saty+Pratha
PROSTHESES Many people in developing countries do not have access to prostheses and other medical supplies.
The reasons for this include long production times, high transport costs and a lack of trained professionals.
3 D scanning and printing can solve some of these issues and make what had previously been impossible possible for poor, remote regions.
Pictured:
Prostheses from 3 D PrintAbility, a project of the
It is a technological innovation that may transform the global economy:
3 D printing.
Additive manufacturing, as three-dimensional printing technology is known in technical terms, has already become established in the automobile and aviation industries, medicine, and mechanical engineering and tool making.
This production technology, writes British magazine The Economist, will lead to a “fourth industrial revolution.”
In order to understand this revolution, you have to know how additive manufacturing works.
With 3 D printing, a product is not ground, cut, drilled or milled as with traditional methods.
Instead, a 3 D printer adds materials:
Plastic, ceramic or metal powder is used as the “ink.”
This material is applied in thin layers according to digital design data, until the desired three-dimensional object is created.
This type of production has substantial economic advantages over previous industrial production.
A product, such as a spare car part, can be produced locally almost anywhere in the world.
A printer is all that is needed.
This will save time because it allows for printing on demand.
This will shorten transport routes significantly because the replacement part will no longer need to be shipped halfway around the world.
This will save transport and warehouse costs.
At the same time, it will help preserve the environment.
There will be less waste, as only the material that it is actually needed will be used.
Democratization of Industry If additive manufacturing continues to gain ground, it will have a significant impact on delivery and value-added processes as well as business models.
Not only will this method save time and money, but it also has the potential to “democratize” industrial production.
In the future, consumers may be able to download the model for a tool or object from the Internet as they now do a song or a movie and have it printed at a 3 D print shop around the corner.
One of the most important benefits of the technology is the ability to print even individual parts cheaply, because no expensive tools or prototypes need to be created to do so.
It is still not entirely clear what the global impact of this technology will be.
However, some developments are already foreseeable:
1 — As fewer people are directly involved in the production of an item, labor unit costs, i.
e.
, the labor costs per product unit, will fall.
This could lead to a re-industrialization in rich countries.
It will be very lucrative for them to print industrial products domestically rather than having them manufactured in a low-wage country and transported halfway around the world.
Production, which is now mainly outsourced to low-wage countries, could thus in the foreseeable future move closer to the market where the products are actually sold.
2 — 3 D printing could also represent an opportunity for developing countries.
Currently, these countries are often cut off from international supply chains, due not least to high transport costs.
In the future, it may be possible for them to print the necessary parts locally and thus build up their own industry.
3 — There are high-tech niches, even in small countries.
In Switzerland, for example, technology company Oerlikon has become a leading provider of materials for 3 D printing in industrial applications.
4 — 3 D printing opens the door to previously unthinkable applications:
Organs from a printer could make donors’organs superfluous; parts produced in space could provide new momentum for space travel.
The European Space Agency (ESA) is already testing a 3 D printer for the construction of a lunar station.
The market is still limited.
Last year, according to a report by the management consulting firm Wohlers Associates, just 5.2 billion US dollars was spent on 3 D printing and the associated services.
According to estimates by McKinsey&amp; Co., however, this figure could be up to 550 billion dollars a year in ten years.
Ulrich Kaiser works in Global Equity and Credit Research at Credit Suisse.
Photo:
Pari Dukovic
INDUSTRY It looks like a normal thermal spray gun, which has long been used to paint objects such as bridges.
But the Metco 16 E made by Swiss technology group Oerlikon is a small revolution:
Parts of it were printed on a 3 D printer.
This allows Oerlikon to reduce the complexity, weight and production costs of the device.
The 16 E is a good example of additive manufacturing:
Western companies
Photo:
Jackson Lowen
HOUSE Build a house without masonry noise, machinery, cranes or scaffolding?
This is already a reality:
Whether in Amsterdam, where a canal house is rising layer by layer, or in Dubai, where a 250-squaremeter office building was printed in 17 days, or in China, where the company WinSun has already printed villas and five-story residential buildings.
The photo shows the prototype for a single-family house
Photo:
Duy Vo
CLOTHING Dutch fashion designer Iris van Herpen sent the first 3 D printed item of clothing down the catwalk in 2010:
a white top from her Crystallization collection.
Haute couture is not alone in having discovered the technology.
Major brands, such as Nike and New Balance, are already working with it as well.
It has completely altered supply chains.
Bulk products, such as t-shirts or sneakers, will no longer have
Photo:
Bobby Doherty/New York Magazine
ORGAN Researchers at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in the US have used a 3 D printer to create an ear.
They used liquid plastics and human cells that they had cultivated as materials.
The organ was successfully transplanted onto mice.
Researchers are convinced that it will be possible in the long term to create even more complex organs, such as kidneys, from a patient’s cells.
This would make the often
The End of Routine
US studies report that middle-income employees face the heaviest pressure from digitalization.
Is that true in Switzerland as well?
By Sara Carnazzi Weber
For some, it ’s fascinating, for others it ’s a nightmare.
Ambivalence has always marked the relationship between people and machines.
The battle between belief in progress and fear of it goes back at least two hundred years to the era of industrialization.
Some sought greater efficiency; others feared that machines would make their work superfluous.
That did not happen; quite the contrary.
By the beginning of the twentieth century, work for many people in Western countries was shaped by machines, and the population ’s standard of living was much higher than at the time of industrialization.
Since then, the world has gone digital.
Automation and artificial intelligence are creating opportunities that were the stuff of yesterday ’s science fiction.
Once again, anxiety levels rise, and the end of human work is said to be nigh.
Technology will decisively shape our lives and our work.
To what degree and how rapidly, however, remains to be seen.
There are certainly clear consequences of this trend evident today.
For some time now, technical progress has driven a shift in the demand for labor, with a greater emphasis on highly qualified labor.
The talk is of “qualification-driven technological change,” which is increasing the productivity of highly qualified professions in particular.
Since the 1990s, this trend has coincided with a tendency towards polarization on the labor market:
demand for occupations with mid-level qualifications is stagnating or even declining, while it grows for those with both low and high qualifications.
As a result, wages and salaries are rising at both ends of the distribution, while the middle goes without.
When it comes to polarization, it is no longer just about the qualifications needed for an occupation.
More prominent now are the very activities that constitute an occupation.
That ’s what influences an occupation ’s susceptibility to automation.
Those positions with a high degree of routine tasks play a central role because code can be written for routines, so computers, robots or algorithms can assume those tasks.
The latest advances in artificial intelligence are creating new openings.
Today they can perform routine mental labor as well because they have the ability to learn.
Fig. 1 Winners:
industries with high wage levels
Annual growth of employment by industry (in full-time equivalents), 1995 – 2015.
Annual employment growth per wage category (right-hand scale)
A Doctor Is Hard to Replace A comparison of routine intensity with the qualifications needed within an occupation shows that high routine intensity is not concentrated in either the highly qualified occupations or those at the other end of the spectrum where few qualifications are required.
Highly qualified occupations require not only technical knowledge but also strong analytical and decision-making skills that complement the technology used.
Occupations with few qualifications also frequently entail manual, but not repetitive, tasks, or interactive tasks that are not easily replaced by digital technology.
In contrast, occupations with mid-level qualifications often carry with them high routine intensity.
Their tasks are clearly defined and are relatively easy to automate.
Some examples:
In doctor/patient interactions, machines are far from being able to match humans, but are quite good at interpreting blood values or x-ray images.
A computer cannot satisfactorily translate a novel or a poem, but could manage the translation of standard business correspondence.
According to this logic, tasks involved in bookkeeping or repetitive services in the finan-
Information services
8% Social services 2%
Personnel placement
4% 1% 0 0
– 4%
Wood and paper industry Jobs associated with financial and insurance
– 1% services
Textile, clothing, leather, leather goods and shoe
– 8% manufacturers
– 2%
Low wages Medium-level wages High wages
Source:
Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Credit Suisse cial sector are under greater threat than the work of a hair stylist.
Fig. 2 Differing Wage Dynamics
Real gross wages according to level of qualifications required for the job, 1998= 100
110 100 90 Most demanding work Occupational and technical knowledge required Simple and repetitive activities Independent and qualified work 1998 2004 2010
Slight Polarization in Switzerland Polarization in the labor market was first observed in the United States and the United Kingdom.
Since then, a few continental European countries have begun to show signs of an increasingly polarized employment structure.
Is Switzerland among them?
Based on data regarding wage structure and employment trends, we have attempted to answer that question.
To that end, we have considered employment trends for various industry groups according to their level of pay.
Wages are understood as an indication of the underlying qualification.
In a polarized labor market, one would expect a U-shaped graph:
high increase in employment for the low- and high-wage occupational groups, with simultaneous stagnation and/or reduced wages in the mid-range.
A look at the trend in Switzerland from 1995 to 2015 reveals slight but not clear polarization (Fig. 1).
The clear winners in terms of employment trends are those industries with high wage levels such as research and development, pharmaceuticals or jobs in the information services area.
And in the low wage area, there are certainly industries with high employment growth, such as social services, personnel placement or work such as building maintenance and security services.
On the other side of the coin, industries that offer mid-level wages are seeing a loss of jobs, such as some industrial sectors, construction or publishing.
A comparison of employment growth in those three wage categories between 1995 and 2015 shows a clear lead for industries with higher wage levels, which enjoyed employment growth of 2.1 percent annually.
Employment grew on average just 0.5 percent and 0.6 percent annually in those industries with low or mid-level wages.
The development of real wages in relation to the level of qualifications required for the job also provides indications of slight polarization.
Positions with the second-highest level of requirements – independent and skilled work – have lost some ground since the end of the 1990s.
In contrast, real wages for highly demanding work as well as jobs with lower levels of requirements have definitely improved (Fig. 2).
More Income for the Middle Class There are indications of polarization in the labor market in Switzerland too, but they are not particularly pronounced.
This is evident in the solidity of the middle class,
Repetitive activities involved in bookkeeping are under greater threat than the work of a hair stylist.
which to date has been spared the erosion so obvious in the Anglo-Saxon world.
Not only has the income share of the middle class remained fairly stable since the 1970s, it has even been able to increase its income from employment and household income in the last 10 to 15 years.
Switzerland has not seen the dramatic untethering of the highest incomes such as in the United States.
Whether or not this polarization tendency will grow in the future depends on the actual automation of routine tasks.
Source:
Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Credit Suisse
The ability to automate does not mean a replacement will actually be made.
The economic feasibility of such an investment plays a role, along with legal and ethical issues.
The relative costs of labor and capital play a crucial role.
A company will only replace workers with machines if it means being able to make production more cost-effective.
If wages are relatively low and the cost of automation high, replacement does not necessarily make sense.
Work in general will not be disappearing that soon.
Routine jobs, perhaps.
Sara Carnazzi Weber is head of Fundamental Macro Research at Credit Suisse.
Going Digital to Combat Locational Disadvantages
Manufacturing in Switzerland is relatively expensive.
This makes technological development all the more important for companies.
Our study of 2,000 Swiss SMEs reveals that 21.9 percent are already heavily to very heavily digitalized.
By Patricia Feubli
The discontinuation of the EUR/CHF minimum exchange rate on January 15, 2015, reignited the debate about Switzerland ’s future as a business location.
Although the SMEs participating in our annual survey of 2,000 Swiss SMEs said that Switzerland as a business center helped to promote success, many of them see themselves threatened by emerging markets.
So our survey also asked participants about the disadvantages of Switzerland as a business location compared with other countries and possible solutions to these disadvantages.
There was a clear answer in response to the question about how much of a disadvantage Switzerland faces as a business location compared to other countries in terms of construction costs, availability of skilled workers and complexity of legal regulations:
Switzerland is at a disadvantage
In some cases, digital technologies require major infrastructure investments.
in particular with regard to construction costs.
Of the SMEs surveyed, 56.5 percent indicated that other countries have significant advantages in this area compared to Switzerland.
In terms of the availability of skilled employees and the complexity of legal regulations, however, the majority of SMEs surveyed (59.8 percent and 63.0 percent, respectively) said foreign companies enjoyed no advantage.
Newer SMEs More Heavily Digitalized
Share of responding SMEs that use stateof-the-art digital technologies heavily or very heavily, by year of founding
18% 12 6 0 Heavy Very heavy Prior to 1991 1991 – 2000 2001 – 2010 2010 or later
Despite potentially higher production costs, many Swiss SMEs are very successful and are able to compete internationally.
How do these SMEs deal with Switzerland ’s locational disadvantages?
We asked survey participants about the importance of five different measures to combat locational disadvantages.
SMEs cited the introduction of new technologies as the most important, with 41 percent calling it a very important method for combating locational disadvantages.
Digitalization plays a central role in the introduction of new technologies, as 77.5 percent of SMEs believe they can increase their international competitiveness significantly through the high utilization of state-of-the-art digital technologies –
Source:
Credit Suisse SME Survey 2016 such as big data analyses or self-organizing production systems.
In some cases, these technologies require major investments in infrastructure.
For example, different types of information, such as machine data, product names, handwritten notes and customer requests submitted by email must be provided in a standard format so they can be understood by all of the machines, computers and employees involved.
It is therefore no surprise that, according to the survey, larger and higher-revenue as well as newer SMEs tend to be more heavily digitalized than the other SMEs.
Newer SMEs can implement new digital technologies and their requirements right when they are founded, allowing them to avoid costly modifications at a later stage.
Patricia Feubli is part of the Swiss Industry Research team at Credit Suisse.
Credit Suisse SME Survey 2016 The complete study may be downloaded at:
credit-suisse.
com/research
“It should stay like this, even when I ’m 70.
That ’s why I ’m already planning now.”
No matter what comes your way.
credit-suisse.
com
“Technology gives us super-human powers.”
Computers and robots relieve us of repetitive activities, so we can concentrate on the interesting parts of life and work.
This began with the invention of the plow and applies even more so in the age of technology, says Sebastian Thrun, a prophet of the digital world.
By Daniel Ammann, Simon Brunner (interview), Mathew Scott (photo) and Bryan Christie Design (illustration)
Mr. Thrun, a simple question to get started.
What makes us human?
Of course, you mean that ironically – but the answer is actually surprisingly simple.
Human beings are the center of our world.
Creativity and value systems are what make us human.
And for all of us, our fellow humans are the most important elements of our life.
When we think about digital technologies, such as artificial intelligence for instance, are we also thinking about the nature of human beings then?
Exactly.
With each new technology, we reexamine the human condition, humanity ’s existence and our understanding of ourselves as human beings.
It always revolves around the same thing:
giving human beings super-human powers.
We could not have talked to each other 150 years ago because our voices alone were not loud enough to be heard from the US to Switzerland.
We could not swim across the Atlantic either; we ’re simply not built to do it.
Today, however, we talk over the Internet – or fly from Los Angeles to Zurich in 12 hours.
Sebastian Thrun, 49, is considered one of the technology pioneers of our time.
In 2005 the German citizen became a public figure when a team under his leadership used a modified VW Touareg to win the most impor- tant prize for self-driving cars in the Mojave Desert.
Thrun was responsible for self-driving cars at Google from 2007 on, his team also invented Google Street View, and he established Google X, the secret development lab that is intended to come up with the next moonshot.
Thrun is a professor at Stanford and has published over 370 scientific articles and 11 books.
His special area of expertise is theoretical robotics.
From 2012 to 2014, Thrun was on Credit Suisse ’s Board of Directors, and today he is a senior advisor at the Credit Suisse Lab in Silicon Valley.
The term artificial intelligence was coined in 1956, exactly 60 years ago.
Expectations have been huge for this new discipline ever since, but with the exception of a handful of Hollywood films, it has never fulfilled them.
Is that different now?
Yes, it is definitely different.
In the past, we tried to teach a machine rules by programming it with every conceivable situation.
That is of course impossible.
Today, we pursue a different method.
We let the computer itself learn.
We no longer program by prescribing rules to the computer, but by giving it examples.
Specifically, you show a computer a hundred million websites, and it will extract the rules of good web design itself.
Is that such a big difference?
Yes, that is a fundamentally different approach.
Imagine you had to explain every rule on earth to your child.
You ’d be at it for a very long time.
Computers progress faster when they learn for themselves, just as we do.
This is new.
There is a whole wave of self-learning systems, such as IBM ’s Watson, which taught itself to play Jeopardy, a popular quiz show in the US – and it beat the best players in the world.
Watson, AlphaGo from Google and other similar programs draw their own conclusions from very large data sets.
They can “look at” 100 million MRI images within fractions of a second, for instance, and compare your cruciate ligament with an enormous sample group.
No human being can do that.
How will the interaction between humans and machines develop?
We are at the very beginning.
Look at past achievements, agriculture being a good example.
The plow, the combine and the tractor made us stronger.
We could say that the human spirit was paired with the physical strength of the machine.
The same applied later to cars and airplanes.
Today we have come to the point where machines no longer simply supplement the muscle power or motor abilities we lack; they can take over almost all of our repetitive activities.
Just think of the self-driving car.
Can you give us another example that impresses you?
Technology is making great progress in medical diagnosis, for example.
Artificial intelligence systems can already recognize certain skin diseases better than physicians can.
Synthetic biology, which can already be used to create cells, is also very interesting.
I believe that we will be able to get a grip on most cancers and circulatory diseases.
And we will be able to double our life expectancy in the foreseeable future.
This is only the beginning of world history.
Ninety-nine percent of interesting things have not yet been invented.
Artificial intelligence will relieve us of mentally undemanding activities.
In the future, we will be able to concentrate on creative work.
On the things that are really interesting.
Many people are afraid that robots are threatening their jobs.
Rightly so?
Let ’s look at the past again.
Just 300 years ago, almost everyone in Europe worked in agriculture or in a household.
They plowed the fields, milked cows, washed, cleaned and cooked.
That devoured unbelievable amounts of time.
There was no electric power and there were no engines.
Hygiene was miserable and medical care poor.
Life expectancy in Europe was not even 30.
If someone romanticizes about those times and wants to live back then, I can understand why technological progress raises concerns for that person …
That sounds ironic.
Then seriously:
I believe that history supports my optimistic attitude that new technologies will make human beings’lives simpler.
The balance is positive, even if you include dangerous technologies in the equation.
Today, far fewer people die in war than 100 years ago.
Fewer people starve and life expectancy is continuously increasing.
Naturally, there are still many people who live in poverty or are even enslaved.
That will not change with one stroke.
But the Internet gives more people a chance to work on the progress of humanity – and profit from it as well.
Five hundred years ago, most people could not even read or write.
Today, thanks to the Internet, at least half of the population of the world has access to the entire, or to nearly the entire, knowledge of humanity.
The world is in fact becoming flatter and flatter.
You ’ve said your most important mission is to democratize knowledge.
What do you mean by that?
It bothers my sense of justice that excellent education is very unequally distributed.
Very few people have the chance to go to the best universities in the world, which remain closed to almost everyone.
Yet there is hardly anything that is as well documented as the efficacy of education.
People who are better educated lead better lives, have more money, fewer diseases, longer life expectancy and much more.
That ’s why we created an online educational institution with Udacity, where we can give people a chance who had none before by offering them high quality education.
We see education not in the sense of an expensive Rolex, but in the spirit of Ikea.
These are people who have already finished a first career and now want to start a second one.
We make that possible.
Udacity ’s valued at one billion dollars today.
In the beginning, you called your own offering lousy.
Why?
We began with free courses, what are called massive open online courses.
The completion rates were very bad, though.
Only 5 percent of the participants successfully completed the courses.
Today
This is just the beginning of world history.
Ninety-nine percent of interesting things have not been invented yet.
Education in the spirit of Ikea.
We want to educate as many people as possible, as well as possible.
comes to Udacity, they learn not only from books and videos, but also through very concrete projects based in practice.
It ’s about making something oneself, about learning by doing.
And our experts then give individual feedback for each project.
It is a little like sports.
You do n’t get into shape if you only watch others play.
And you do n’t really learn anything if you only watch professors, without becoming actively involved.
Udacity has a social mission, but you nonetheless want to make money in the process – why?
It may sound odd, but we realized that it makes things simpler.
We do n’t waste resources on fundraising, we have to be 100 percent aligned with our customers, and we also keep an eye on costs.
We take great pains, however, to keep our offerings as inexpensive as possible for our customers.
We are approximately 50 times cheaper than Stanford.
We want to educate as many people as possible, as well as possible.
What is your favorite example of that?
There are so many.
If I could only give one, it would be an American mother who had been a housewife for 20 years, taking care of her three children.
She completed a programming course with Udacity and afterward was able to start at Google as a programmer.
We have a large box of letters from people who thank us for making a positive change in their lives.
These letters always sound very similar.
we have a success rate of 90 percent.
We consciously took the path of launching something that was still incomplete.
That meant we could feel the market from the outset and consistently align Udacity to people ’s needs.
What did you change?
We no longer regard education merely as conveying content but instead as a service, and we even give a guarantee.
If the graduate does not find a job, we refund the course fee.
We generally offer more than just online courses today.
When someone
Udacity is a presence around the world – how do the cultural differences among the students find expression?
In Switzerland and Germany, education is regarded as completely or nearly free of charge, while it ’s normal in the US to pay for it.
And in Europe, in contrast to the US, it is not yet common to go back to the university in the middle of a career in order to study for another degree.
Our offshoots in China and India are just getting going.
What I see there is that demand is unbelievably high.
People take personal responsibility for their career and ask less for government aid.
They pay for their own advanced education because they – rightly – think that, by doing so, they improve their chances and the investment is well worth it.
Your company assumes that the traditional education pattern “primary school – university – lifelong employment” is passé.
Why?
In the US, it ’s already the case that 26 percent of the workforce moves from job to job, essentially working on demand.
The average employee there stays at a job only four and a half years.
People in Switzerland and Germany will have to more thoroughly dispense with the idea that they will have one job for life.
Companies are increasingly forced to adapt to changing times.
That means job losses.
Yes.
But there is also a positive side.
People can always continue their development; new opportunities open up for them.
Education evolves alongside work.
People live longer and will have to continue educating themselves as they grow older.
The principle behind the university is indeed outmoded.
Can it really be the case that the best way to educate people was invented a thousand years ago?
But the market for universities and other higher learning institutions is growing because they must focus not only on high school graduates, but on all of society.
It ’s exactly the same in other industries:
my insurance, my water and electricity company are there for me throughout my life – only my university is not.
Although the need to learn is lifelong.
You have an eight-year old son.
What is important to you in his education?
What we call here in California the growth mindset is very important to me.
We view the brain like a muscle that can be trained and grow.
It is important that my son has the ability to be curious about the world and to try new things.
This ability and also the willingness to adapt your view of things to constantly changing circumstances are more important than your current knowledge base.
The people of tomorrow will have to learn and improve continuously.
That is a way of thinking, a mentality, that I want to give my son.
Is it working?
Jasper goes to a new experimental school that emphasizes projects and learning at
In the long run, what concerns me in everything I do is people, empowering and promoting them – emboldening them to be free.
one ’s own pace.
He loves going to school and ca n’t stand vacation.
What jobs will be in demand when Jasper is grown up?
Pardon my saying so, but that ’s the wrong question, it negates development.
Twenty years ago, it was not possible to foresee that today, for example, search engine optimizers, mechatronic engineers or data analysts would be very much in demand.
And the speed of change is only increas-
Sebastian Thrun ’s Projects
UDACITY
The U stands for university, plus “audacity,” which means boldness or daring.
This online education institution wants to make “continuing education available, accessible, affordable, appealing and offering the latest content.”
Course topics are aligned with the job market, and there are lectures for Android developers, Ruby on Rails developers and an introduction to iOS development.
These courses are offered in co-operation with leading technology companies like Facebook, Amazon and Google, and last six to nine months.
The diploma is called a nano degree.
GOOGLE GLASS
At Google, Sebastian Thrun was the “moonshot man,” meaning he was responsible for big inventions like glasses with minicomputers, Street View cars and the Loon project that uses gas-filled balloons to bring the Internet to remote areas.
STANLEY
Under Thrun ’s leadership, the Stanford racing team developed a self-driving VW Touareg that won the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge, a 212 kilometer long race in the desert near Las Vegas.
The prize money was about two million dollars, which was the highest prize for a robotics competition to date.
PEARL
During his time at Carnegie Mellon University (1998 – 2003), Thrun developed Pearl, a robotic caregiver for the elderly.
RHINO
As part of his doctoral work at the University of Bonn (1995), Thrun built a robot that gave museum tours, among other tasks.
security, mobile banking, new credit models and new databases for financial transactions, such as block chain technology.
With digital systems, banking can become much more transparent, more economical and faster.
Customers will profit from all of that too.
We want to be able to offer them better and better products.
“Stanley” in the desert:
Thrun with his team ’s prize-winning self-driving car.
(2005) ing.
You can say with certainty that creative people will have better opportunities in the future.
Technology jobs will play a big role, especially in industries that do n’t traditionally have a lot to do with technology.
So, for instance, biology has already changed dramatically in the direction of data science.
Big data will also change medicine, the law, and perhaps even historical research.
Whatever the industry, without an affinity for technology, a person will have fewer chances on the job market.
So it ’s not only the unions that are worried.
Digitalization threatens many of today ’s work models.
Are we moving toward a proletariat far removed from technology and removed from the job market too?
It ’s pointless to want to stop progress, it ’s never worked.
It would be much more important for unions to promote continual training for their members so their people are prepared for new technologies.
We should n’t want to nail down the status quo; instead we should prepare ourselves for ever faster change.
It ’s not only fear of job loss that grows with digitalization.
There ’s also the fear of loss of privacy.
That does n’t worry me a great deal.
Look, it ’s not in the interest of any company to deploy knowledge against the will of its customers.
Large technology companies are all based on the trust of their customers.
If that trust is abused, the customers will soon be gone.
I see many of these companies from the inside.
My impression is that these companies’ethics are much more developed than it appears from the outside.
In the end, they want to please their customers.
You were on Credit Suisse ’s Board of Directors, and you recently became an advisor to Credit Suisse Labs, a financial technology workshop in Silicon Valley.
What is being developed there?
It ’s not only about trying out new technologies but, on a much more fundamental level, about strengthening innovative thinking and developing new business models.
Credit Suisse has always been a progressive bank.
It would like to ensure that it remains a technology leader with these labs.
Can you give us two or three specific examples?
The labs are currently under development; it would be just too early for me to reveal too much.
But generally speaking, we are working on the big topics, like cyber
Finally, a personal question:
You must have enjoyed reading the big science fiction novels as a youngster, such as those by H.
G.
Wells, Isaac Asimov, Philip K.
Dick.
There you’re mistaken.
I preferred Heinrich Böll or Max Frisch.
I’ve always been more interested in people than technologies.
Technology is just a tool.
In the long run, what concerns me in everything I do is people, empowering and promoting them – emboldening them to be free.
Clouds, Shadows, Military Robots
The world is not becoming more complicated ‒ it ’s just changing.
Nineteen terms related to the digital future that you should know now.
By Ben Hammersley (text) and QuickHoney (illustrations)
2The Cloud
Conceptually speaking, this is where people are when they are online.
It is the place where all information, communication and things are located.
There will probably be a time when people look back and say that the cloud was the start of the 21s t century.
From a technical point of view, it is somewhat more prosaic.
Ultimately, the cloud is a sort of storage system with a sufficiently fast connection to the Internet.
3Community Management
For some people, the Internet can be both scary and mundane at the same time.
The dangers of a technology that people use every day but do not truly understand are clear.
In such cases, online community managers can help.
As moderators, they manage, facilitate or censor online discussions, and are a civilizing force wherever people come together in the digital world, such as in forums.
1Moore ’s Law
In 1965, Gordon Moore, one of the co-founders of microprocessor manufacturer Intel, described the following phenomenon:
The number of components on a chip doubles each year, while the price remains the same.
This trend continued for a decade.
In 1975, he revised his forecast from every year to every two years.
Computing power has doubled every two years since then.
In other words, the same power at half the price.
Moore ’s Law is the basis for this article and a symbol of the pace of technological progress.
4Shanzhai
Copies of luxury goods are not a new phenomenon.
But over the past decade, the market for imitation products, particularly in China, has grown significantly.
Shanzhai, or “mountain stronghold” in English, reflects a kind of Robin Hood self-conception.
Expensive luxury products are taken from the wealthy and made available for all.
Mobile phones, in particular, are copied, as well as clothing and even architecture.
53 D Printers
When computers are capable of making physical objects, they will become an essential component of industrial and creative production.
3 D printers work by applying materials in layers, a process known as additive manufacturing.
These printers are currently still quite expensive and unreliable.
But the prospects for the future are very interesting.
For example, at some point a homeowner will be able to use a 3 D printer in the basement to replace a broken window at a moment ’s notice.
See photo gallery starting on page 8.
6Attention Economy
Life was simpler when there was less choice.
On a rainy Sunday in a small town in the late 1980s, there were fewer than 50 things to do for entertainment:
a couple of TV channels, a movie theater, a few radio stations and books or magazines.
Today, the Internet provides us with access to the world.
This means that companies need to find new ways to win our sharply divided attention.
7Tech Nomads
Over the past century, the idea has arisen that in the future we will be able to work from home in our pajamas thanks to new communication technologies that free us from the office.
In many digitalized professions, it does not matter where people work as long as they have access to data and communication ‒ this is the basis of life for tech nomads who want something more than just freedom:
a new simplicity.
They do not need much more than a laptop.
Crowdsourcing Probably the most well-known example of crowdsourcing ‒ in which a larger whole is created quickly and inexpensively from small contributions by individuals – is Wikipedia.
A remarkably simple idea that has become the Internet authority.
It shows how people can and want to work together if it ’s fun and provides a greater sense of purpose.
9Memes
If we live in a world where ideas and information are more important than physical objects, then it ’s a good idea to know how ideas really work.
This is not a question of devising a rule for good ideas, but rather of showing how ideas spread, how they travel ‒ from person to person, from company to company and from country to country.
Call it education or cultivation, style, gossip, stories or sermons; it is all based on one core principle:
memes – ideas that are picked up and spread.
Nowadays, this process often takes place on the Internet.
The Quantified Self In 2008, a group of digital pioneers discovered that they could improve their health by collecting personal physical and mental health data on their smartphones.
Using social media, this data was compared with their friends’data, and it was not long before an entire industry arose with programs and apps to help people measure and improve themselves on an ongoing basis.
Space Travel for All The US space agency NASA flew its last Space Shuttle mission on July 21, 2011.
With the shuttle subsequently being taken out of service, you might think that would be the end of manned space travel.
Instead, we will see space dominated by private companies over the next few years:
Virgin Galactic, SpaceX and Bigelow Aerospace all want to offer tourists the experience of weightlessness.
And universities and small companies can now order small satellites on the Internet for 8,000 US dollars to get data on demand from the universe.
Data Shadows A hundred years ago, the average person left almost no trace behind other than a birth certificate and a death certificate.
The average person in 2016 provides more data with an afternoon trip to the supermarket than his counterpart in 1916 did in his entire life.
No wonder then that many people are concerned about the “surveillance society.”
While most of these data shadows are mundane, they do raise a number of questions involving individuals’rights versus the needs of the general public.
Information Overload We are bombarded with more information than we could ever hope to process.
This can cause stress and make us unhappy.
Yes, the average office worker receives 50 emails a day.
And yes, some people are constantly updating on Facebook or sharing their lives with the world every ten minutes via Twitter.
But no one is forced to do so.
And we are learning how to handle information better ‒ with help from certain software, of course.
Return to Artisanal Crafts The Internet is celebrating its 25th anniversary in 2016.
The people who created it and changed our lives are now middle-aged or elderly, and many, such as Tim Berners-Lee, have turned to artisanal activities.
Is the problem that digital creativity is not very fulfilling?
It ’s not so simple.
First, the desire for homemade things is probably a response to hyperconsumerism.
Second, information about artisanal crafts is now accessible to everyone online, and there are new opportunities thanks, for example, to 3 D printers and digital sewing machines.
Gamification Even if you have never played a computer game, you are involved in game design as soon as you use the Internet.
The gamification of the world turns every human activity into a game.
The reason for this is simple:
Many, many people like to play.
And these games are designed by a creative industry that has grown into a cultural and economic power.
Net Neutrality The Internet has no central authority.
It is built on the basic idea of trial and error and on a simple principle:
All data is equal.
It does not matter if it is an email or video stream.
From this point of view, your email is just as important as an email from President Obama.
This is net neutrality.
However, internet providers would like to prioritize certain content so they can charge more for it.
The discussion of this issue is ongoing and it is extremely political.
Darknet The internet is bigger than you think.
It is estimated that around 90 percent of content is not visible to search engines.
In any case, there are dark corners everywhere that can only be found when using special programs and codes.
And very strange things tend to happen in the dark.
But as always in the digital world, there are an infinite number of shades.
Many places in the darknet are sites of pure peace with no underground caves, such as scientific publications and library content.
Anonymous If there is a group that makes us feel outdated, it is the activist and hacker collective Anonymous.
It demonstrates why the digital world is so different from the analog world.
Anonymous has no geographical home base and no central structure until it creates one – and then it only does so for a few minutes.
The group does not even have an objective until it defines one.
But when it believes that someone has violated the laws of the Internet, it immediately becomes a relentless and extremely powerful underground movement.
Ben Hammersley, 40, is a British journalist and author.
The information age expert’s books include:
“Now for Then:
How to Face the Digital Future without Fear” and “A Smart Guide to Utopia.”
Trial and Error
California ’s AltSchool is a start-up dedicated to the learning of the future.
Using tablet computers, robots and apps, its students acquire the fundamental skills needed for creative work.
By Steffan Heuer (text) and David Magnusson (photos)
Left page:
Five- to eight-yearold students are working on their first robot prototype, a project that teaches them to tackle a problem from various angles.
Right page:
Technology and personal attention are at the heart of the AltSchool approach.
It ’s almost like stumbling into a start-up business staffed by extremely young employees.
Twenty children are absorbed in their projects.
Their goal:
to complete a fully functional robot prototype by Demo Day.
Every morning, they sit down with their two “managers” to discuss task specifications, where delays are occurring and who has the necessary expertise to solve a hardware or software problem.
The rest of the day is a time of “creative chaos” as students assemble and test a variety of components:
light-emitting diodes, batteries, circuits and software modules.
If they reach a dead end, students can consult a large whiteboard with the names of experts in various areas – reading and writing, for example, or art or sewing.
These robotics experts are between the ages of five and eight.
At San Francisco ’s AltSchool, they are learning what projectoriented, personalized learning will look like in the future.
They are completing a two-week intensive course designed to teach them what experts have identified as key skills for the 21s t century:
design thinking, or how to approach a problem; iteration, or a willingness to learn quickly from mistakes and to continue testing new versions over and over again; constant networking with other people; and making use of all of the other benefits the Internet has to offer.
“It ’s not about being able to present a finished robot at the end of the process,” says Kristin Uhlemeyer, who teaches the course.
“The goal is to be able and motivated to approach a problem from many different perspectives.
The realization that failure can be positive and beneficial is applicable to a host of other contexts.”
Schools Have to Be Flexible This sums up the philosophy of AltSchool, a private school in California.
AltSchool is engaged in an ambitious and widely noted experiment that seeks to replace the traditional teacher-centered model of instruc- tion with ideas, structures and tools borrowed from Silicon Valley.
Max Ventilla, the school ’s founder, raised 130 million US dollars in venture capital to realize his vision of a network of “micro-schools,” each of which includes only one or two classes.
A former Google executive, Ventilla has opened eight AltSchool sites over the past three years – mostly in San Francisco, but also in New York and Chicago.
At present, 400 students from first to eighth grade, called beta testers, are enrolled in
“Traditional schools are unable to change, for a number of reasons.”
AltSchool.
They receive intensive support and guidance from nearly 200 teachers, programmers, designers and other experts.
The goal is to determine whether this idea can be expanded into a nationwide business.
Ventilla wants to make this experiment into a model that others, including public school systems, will want to copy as they recognize that it leads to more successful learning and also makes financial sense.
“Traditional schools are unable to
01 In a robotics course, students interact with experts – or, as in the photo, with an audio-video robot.
02 Cameras record day-to-day activities at school; teachers can “mark” special moments and retrieve them later on.
01 02
Max Ventilla, 35, is the founder of AltSchool.
A former Google executive, he raised 130 million US dollars in venture capital to open a school that would promote more successful learning while also making a profit.
Four hundred students from first to eighth grade are currently “beta testers” at AltSchool.
They benefit from the intensive support and guidance of nearly 200 teachers, programmers, designers and other experts.
change, for a number of reasons.
Their hierarchies stand in the way of innovation and dynamic progress – qualities that are precisely what we need today,” says Ventilla, 35.
“The faster the world changes, the more flexible schools need to be.
Changes need to start from the bottom.”
The gap between financially secure educational enterprises boasting the latest technologies, on the one hand, and public schools that are in urgent need of modernization, on the other, can be dangerous.
In their most recent annual report on the state of the education system, experts from the National Education Policy Center at the University of Colorado in Boulder concluded that schools are “easy prey” for companies seeking to market their products to children and adolescents.
Software for personalized learning, generally provided free of charge, opens the door to a “surveillance culture” in the classroom – especially because schools are under increasing pressure to digitize their operations.
As the researchers point out, very few teachers are aware of the consequences of using such programs.
Ventilla exudes the self-confidence of a technology expert who achieved success at an early age, and who believes that any problem can be solved through the trial-and-error method if you only collect enough data.
Like so many in Silicon Valley, he was motivated by a personal experience that others may relate to – the search for the right elementary school for his daughter.
After three years, it is still too soon to say whether or not AltSchool has been successful; California gives new schools five years to prove themselves.
There are too few children, and too few completed grade levels, to allow for a reliable comparison with other models.
It is apparent, however, that students are highly motivated by the school ’s combination of a high-tech classroom and abundant personal attention.
For parents and teachers, however, there are new anxieties and
01 02 03 uncertainties.
When every movement or remark in the networked classroom is recorded or streamed live, they experience the stress of having to process every new piece of information.
What ’s more, all of the data collected on children from an early age can be a nightmare for data protection authorities.
Learning Plans Are Called Playlists “We ’re still learning how to use all of these wonderful technological tools,” says Annette Bauer.
An American with German roots, Bauer worked at international schools all over the world before accepting a position as head of an AltSchool site.
She was intrigued by the school ’s emphasis on encouraging a passion for learning.
Teachers meet regularly with internal software experts for “hackathons” or programming sessions, building precisely the technology that the teachers want in their classrooms.
“We try many things, and we ’re the first to admit that some do n’t work out.
But we can make changes in just a few weeks or months,” Bauer says.
AltSchool students use tablets starting at the age of five.
They are later
“We ’re still learning how to use all of these wonderful technological tools.”
provided with Chromebooks for working on their “playlists,” or learning plans, which have lessons or “cards” created especially for each student by their teachers.
Three children in a given class might be reading three versions of the same book, geared to their existing knowledge.
Cameras and microphones are installed in every classroom, so teachers can capture special moments, using an “index button” on the wall, and retrieve the clip later on.
Students do not receive grades.
Progress is shown on a bar graph, which resembles the business-intelligence tools a company might use to optimize its sales or cash flow.
Parents use an app called “Stream” to follow what is happening at school – a kind of social network revolving around their child.
Will a student arrive late today, or is someone going on vacation outside of regular school breaks?
One click lets the teachers know.
Did you like the album with photos from the class trip?
A single click informs the entire class.
Teachers are constantly uploading comments and photos, and they often respond to questions even late at night.
Families pay an average of 25,000 US dollars per year for this combination of technology and individualized
01 Students are in the process of building their first robots.
02 AltSchool teacher Kristin Uhlemeyer shows a student how a light-emitting diode works.
03 – 05 The school teaches the key skills workers will need for the 21s t century:
design thinking, or how to approach a problem; iteration, or the willingness to learn quickly from mistakes and to test new versions over and over again; and constant networking.
Students are expected to take advantage of all the benefits the Internet has to offer.
knowledge workers.
Reach Newschools Capital, an organization that invests in educational startups, includes the following in its list of the 10 top skills for 2020:
critical thinking, emotional intelligence, negotiating skills and cognitive flexibility.
Technology companies large and small tell us that the right software will teach these skills to young minds.
Ventilla ’s company is not the only one to benefit from the enormous sums of money flowing into the “ed tech” industry.
According to the Boston Consulting Group, last year ’s total set a record:
approximately 4.5 billion dollars.
Nearly half of that money went to American companies, followed by investments in China, the UK, India, Germany and Brazil.
The
“Schools need to be honest and admit it when something is n’t working, and they need to have an exit strategy.”
learning, which is not an unusual price for an American private school.
One child in five receives financial aid; this policy is designed to allow children from low-income families to attend AltSchool and to keep it from becoming an elite institution reserved for the wealthy.
Hardware and Software Are Not Enough But what has the AltSchool experiment actually accomplished – aside from generating a mixture of uneasiness and pride on the part of parents who are able to send their children there?
“Both parents and teachers need to be patient.
It ’s impossible to draw conclusions after only two or three years,” says education researcher Daniel Willingham of the University of Virginia, who studies large public school districts and their use of new technologies.
“The biggest mistake of many experimental models is to assume that acquiring hardware and software is enough to improve
05 performance.”
In many cases, he says, nothing changes.
The use of technology and personalized learning will only be successful if teachers continue to help children who are struggling as well as those who complete their assignments more quickly than their peers.
Unless children receive personal attention, even the best iPad programs are useless.
And one more thing is extremely important for the Learning 2.0 project, says Willingham.
“Schools need to be honest and admit it when something is n’t working, and they need to have an exit strategy.”
4.5 Billion Dollars in Venture Capital Many technology experts and educational reformers view experiments like AltSchool as a way to restart an educational system that has lost its way.
They believe that traditional schools have failed to prepare children for the future demands on major high-tech companies, too, want to be present on the screens of first-graders.
In 2015, public schools in the United States spent 4.9 billion dollars to purchase almost 11 million computers and tablets, running operating systems by Apple, Google or Microsoft.
The software installed on these devices generates even more earnings for companies – nearly twice what they earn on hardware.
So it is not surprising that Amazon plans to create an online marketplace for educational materials, called “Inspire,” that will provide such materials to teachers free of charge – as a way of wooing future customers.
It was headline news when Microsoft announced its plans to release a school-specific version of the bestselling game “Minecraft.”
Google is hard at work on several educational services.
These programs, most of which are cloud-based and register every keystroke and click, have attracted the attention of data protection authorities.
Who owns the data of children and adolescents, and who, other than teachers, will have access to this data when commercial providers find their way into schools?
Families that send their children to AltSchool
Annette Bauer, head of AltSchool Dogpatch:
“Our model is a work in progress aimed at changing our conception of school:
Rather than being a straight path from A to B, it should be a flexible route.”
01 The spirit of Silicon Valley:
AltSchool headquarters in San Francisco.
02 The school of the future will be fully digitized.
Absences will be reported with a click of the mouse, and news will be broadcast through the school ’s own social network.
03 Teachers, experts and programmers work closely together.
consent to having them photographed, filmed and recorded, and permit their data to be stored and analyzed indefinitely – to document the child ’s progress and to improve the services the school provides to all of its customers.
After all, AltSchool is an enterprise that is funded by venture capital and expected to turn a profit and produce returns for its roughly two dozen investors – the crème de la crème of Silicon Valley, including Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and the widow of Steve Jobs.
Founder Ventilla has no quarrel with the profit motive:
“We have to invest heavily in the educational system if we want to effect change.
That requires companies willing to invest the necessary financial resources and take risks,” he says.
It is by no means clear at this point that personalized learning is superior to traditional approaches to teaching.
Simply giving a kid an iPad will not make him a genius.
“With all of the investment hype and entrepreneurial frenzy, I worry that some might view personalization as yet another silver bullet for education,” says Jennifer Carolan, a former teacher who now works for the education technology fund Reach Newschool Capital.
If we allow ourselves to be seduced by the false promises of technologists, we may end up simply replacing the traditional classroom with a model in which groups of silent children are absorbed in their devices and isolated from their peers, she warns.
Annette Bauer, head of school at AltSchool Dogpatch, agrees that acquiring social and emotional intelligence is what really counts – learning how to respond to new challenges and how to work with others in a creative process.
Technology, no matter how new, can play only a limited role in this context.
Parents face similar issues.
It ’s not always a good thing to have access to enormous quantities of data about every homework assignment.
If you ’re suddenly given the opportunity to monitor and assess your child 24 hours a day, it can be tempting to micromanage the child ’s activities, which can make life miserable for all concerned.
Older children may feel that they are being spied on; teachers are under constant pressure to defend what they are doing.
Adults Are Anxious “Many of these innovations are driven by the concerns of adults.
Who knows what jobs our children will have in 30 or 40 years?”
asks Julie Lythcott-Haims, who served as dean of freshmen at Stanford University for many years.
“We need to allow them the freedom to try things, rather than monitoring them ever more closely out of a misguided desire to help.”
She criticizes what she refers to as “snowplow parenting” – when overinvolved parents, anxious about the future, try to eliminate any obstacles their children may encounter.
“The result is weak, dependent individuals who are incapable of achieving anything on their own,” says Lythcott-
Haims, whose book on this topic is titled “How to Raise an Adult.”
Head of school Annette Bauer says, “Our model is a work in progress aimed at changing our conception of school:
Rather
“Who knows what jobs our children will have in 30 or 40 years?”
than being a straight path from A to B, it should be a flexible route.”
Children will eventually arrive at their destinations, but each child should determine the path to be taken.
This is beyond the capabilities of an ordinary school.
“Our school needs the help of teachers, technology and parents.
One thing is certain:
Freedom is enormously important,” says Bauer.
“The freedom to try new things and learn from your mistakes – this is an approach children need to internalize.”
She recalls her own childhood in New York.
“Every Saturday we would drive out into the country, and I was allowed to wander around in the woods – with a whistle around my neck.”
And that ’s what a school should look like as it prepares children for an uncertain future.
Except that the whistle is now an app.
Steffan Heuer is a technology journalist and a US-based correspondent for the business magazine brand eins.
He lives in San Francisco, and his daughter is in the first grade at AltSchool.
02 01
03
— Digital/Analog —
Homo Digitalis
Human beings program computers – but computers change us too.
Twelve examples.
By Christian Heinrich (text) and Bratislav Milenkovic (illustration)
IQ
Computer games can make you smarter, at least if you choose the right ones.
In one game called Thinking Games with Elfe and Mathis, developed for children aged 5 to 10 by psychologists at the University of Würzburg, children must complete 120 challenges in their search for the blue diamond of wisdom.
In three remedial classes, student IQs increased from 90 to 101 after playing for just six weeks!
University of Würzburg, 2011
EYES
The wavelength of blue LEDs used in mobile phones, tablets and laptops, is 480 nanometers.
Medical scientists know that special photoreceptors in our eyes are particularly sensitive to that wavelength.
Looking at your smartphone in bed at night can make it more difficult to fall asleep.
Center for Chronobiology, Basel University Psychiatric Clinics, 2014
BRAIN ACTIVITY
Brain activity increases seven percent among people who hold an active mobile phone to their ear for 50 minutes without consciously using it.
That was the finding of a study by the U.
S.
National Institute of Health.
To date, there are no authoritative studies proving that using a mobile phone is harmful.
It is certain, however, that our brains are sensitive to weak magnetic impulses.
National Institute of Health, 2011 MULTITASKING
Multitasking?
Be careful!
The performance of drivers who fiddle with their cell phones when they ’re behind the wheel drops by 40 percent according to scientists at the University of Utah.
That finding makes sense to neuroscientists, since we have known for some time that the human brain is not designed for multitasking – it just switches quickly back and forth between multiple tasks, which significantly increases the error rate.
University of Utah, 2010
EARS
Talking on the telephone a lot significantly increases the odds of suffering from tinnitus, a kind of ringing in the ears.
The incidence of tinnitus is twice as high among heavy phone users compared to the population as a whole.
Just four years of intensive mobile phone use can be enough to trigger the disease, say researchers in a study published in Occupational and Environmental Medicine.
University of Vienna, 2009
THUMBS
Just ten days using a smartphone – that ’s all it takes to make us into real thumb artists!
The area of the brain that reflects thumb sensitivity significantly increases that quickly, according to a study in Current Biology.
University of Fribourg, 2015
HANDS
Students who take notes by hand retain the material better, according a report by the Pew Research Center in Washington, DC.
They found that students taking notes on their laptop during a lecture recorded 79 percent more words – but they were less able to recall what they heard.
Pew Research Center, 2012
HEART
When we listen to music we know and love, our heart vessels expand by an average of 26 percent, according to researchers at the University of Maryland Medical Center.
Music relieves and relaxes the cardiovascular system.
University of Maryland Medical Center, 2008
ISOLATION
Active in social networks online, but isolated offline?
That is nothing but a myth in the view of researchers at the Pew Research Center in Washington, DC.
They have shown that more than 80 percent of people who are active on Twitter and Facebook are also actively engaged in groups offline.
The percentage was only 56 for people who are not active on social media.
Pew Research Center, 2011 BACKACHE
Backache is to digital life what paper cups are to coffee.
Eighteen percent of young people suffer from backache on a daily basis, according to research conducted by the Robert Koch Institute – in the majority of cases, doctors linked the complaint to sitting stiffly in front of the computer screen.
Robert-Koch-Institute, 2012 PHANTOM RINGING
Your smartphone is ringing!
Or not.
Researchers at the Indian Institute of Technology in Hyderabad discovered that 80 percent of young people report feeling their telephone vibrate against their body at least once over a two-week period – even though it did n’t move.
Doctors have already come up with a term for the phenomenon:
phantom pocket vibration syndrome.
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, 2014
DIVIDER
Separation anxiety from your cell phone?
On average, people ’s hearts beat 13 more times per minute faster when temporarily separated from their smartphones, according to a study from the University of Missouri.
University of Missouri, 2015
Christian Heinrich holds a PhD in medicine and works as a freelance journalist.
He writes frequently for Die Zeit and Geo.
“1 +1= 3”
“Digital or analog?”
is the wrong question in the financial sector.
Thanks to new advancements in technology, bank advisors have more time for their clients and are able to provide them with better advice, says Marco Abele, Head of Digital Private Banking at Credit Suisse Switzerland.
By Simon Brunner (text) and Mathilde Agius (photos)
Mr. Abele, few industries today operate to such a degree at the juncture between analog and digital as the financial sector.
On one hand, digitalization has caught up to the banks, while on the other hand, the financial business functions through personal relationships, discretion and tailored consultation.
How can you resolve this conflict?
That ’s the wrong question, in my view.
Digital and analog are not binaries, but are more along the lines of the synergy equation:
1 +1= 3.
New technologies support bank advisors and provide them with more options.
In my opinion, despite digitalization, the advisor should still be the mainstay of the client relationship.
But he can
Accion Venture Lab As part of its Microfinance Capacity Building Initiative, Credit Suisse supports the Accion Venture Lab.
The Venture Lab provides start-up capital for innovative start-ups that improve access to financial services for people living in poverty.
The Venture Lab has thus far invested nearly 10 million US dollars in 24 start-ups around the world in amounts ranging between 100,000 and 500,000 dollars, and it works closely with the start-ups.
www.accion.org/venturelab www.credit-suisse.com/microfinance be relieved of repetitive administrative tasks and therefore be able to spend more time with his clients and provide them with better consultation because he has much more precise information at his fingertips more quickly.
In other words, everyone involved benefits.
Describe the day of a client advisor in the future.
They can do what client advisors around the world do best:
foster client relationships.
Assisting them in doing so are the mobile workplace and greater efficiency achieved through the support of robots.
They provide their clients with a fast, computer-aided and highly personalized advisory service.
Can you give specific examples?
In client meetings, the tablet can use speech recognition to take over the entire task of documentation.
This allows the advisor to focus completely on the client and provide a more personal level of service.
The tablet gives the advisor virtual access to experts right in the meeting room who can be digitally brought in to answer any questions.
For client telephone calls, automated portfolio analysis reveals opportunities and risks to the advisor in real time – an exposed position in the portfolio, for instance.
In other words, her own expertise reaches the client much more rapidly.
At the end of the working day, analysis robots are already taking over the follow-up work and making preparations for the next day.
This, too, is an area where the advisor will be relieved of her current administrative task load.
And which digital platform is available to clients?
The very same one that is used by the advisor, just with fewer functions.
This draws the client and the advisor closer together.
When will these innovations be implemented?
The first client advisors started the pilot phase this summer.
What is special about it is that we did not roll out a ready-to-use solution but rather one that the client advisors themselves can help to design.
Ultimately, we want the technology to be the perfect support for our advisors.
You would like to provide more support to the client advisors, but at the same time, the industry is discussing how robots can take their place.
“Robo-advisors” are financial consultants that manage online portfolios – usually with little or no human involvement.
What will their role be?
Assistance from computers in the investment area is nothing new.
Hedge funds have been using computer-based
At the end of the working day, analysis robots are taking over the follow-up work and making preparations for the next day.
Marco Abele, 47.
The innovation specialist joined Credit Suisse in 2006 and manages the Platform Management&amp;Digitalization unit.
models for their investment decisions for years now.
Last year, these quant funds made up half of the 25 richest hedge funds.
Banks have also made use of automated investment models for years, just behind the scenes.
Putting this power directly in the hands of the clients is a logical next step.
This trend is in its very early stages, though.
The independent robo-advisors appearing in the market today only manage 20 billion US dollars worldwide.
Why have n’t robo-advisors really been accepted?
For one thing, these things take time.
In addition they operate in an extremely limited investment universe.
They usually use algorithms in order to create portfolios based exclusively on exchange traded funds (ETFs).
In many cases, these cannot adequately meet the complex financial needs of private banking clients.
Besides that, robo-advisors are primarily locally based, many of them in the United States – and transferring wealth to the US is not consistent with the security requirements of most clients.
A study predicts that by the year 2020, robo-advisors will manage 450 billion US dollars.
I tend to believe that.
For that reason, Swiss private banks should not rely on their current advantages, because sooner rather than later, automated advisors will overcome these limitations we have mentioned here.
But here, too, I consider this to be a way for Swiss private banks to integrate rather than replace the client advisor.
It will allow them to offer a broad sector of the population access to analysis tools that have previously only been available to wealthy clients.
Pulitzer Prize winning author Thomas L. Friedman called it the “democratization of technology”:
While a company used to need certain financial means and a number of employees in order to manufacture a product, today it seems to need no more than a computer and some venture capital.
Especially in the world of finance, will start-ups replace banks some day?
The fintechs are no small phenomenon.
In the last three years, their global financing has increased seven-fold, reaching around 20 billion US dollars in 2015.
But it remains to be seen whether these fintechs will really be able to replace banks.
Why?
As yet, none of these companies has managed to become a resounding commercial success.
The fintechs promise simpler, more efficient and cheaper services tailored to the needs of a new generation of clients armed with smartphones and tablets.
Unlike a major bank, however, these digital platforms focus only on part of the entire value chain.
Besides that, financial institutions have already been cooperating with fintech companies for a while now.
The mutual understanding is that more can be achieved by working together.
Because of this, we are one of the backers of Impact Hub Zurich, a place where many start-up companies from this sector are located [editor ’s note:
this meeting also took place there].
And finally, the young guns will not be able to replace the many years of experience and expertise of traditional banks overnight.
Young guns:
Many start-up companies from the fintech sector are located at Impact Hub Zurich.
In their own terms, the “entrepreneurial community” comprises “more than 500 innovators, start-ups and corporate partners who come together to design the future of business.”
What distinguishes a modern client advisor?
We have to offer millennials the best solution or they will go somewhere else.
So, we do n’t have to worry about traditional banks?
No, that ’s not true.
Digitalization is changing every industry fundamentally – that includes the financial industry.
There are fewer and fewer clients who go to the bank branches to make payments, who would like printed copies of their bank statements and who choose not to use online banking.
Our future clients, the millennials, have little brand loyalty.
The generation of today ’s 15- to 35-yearolds seeks out the offer that suits them best.
Whether that offer comes from a 160-year-old bank or a social network is completely irrelevant.
We have to offer the best solution or they will go somewhere else.
Under digitalization, accessibility is a key topic.
Thanks to new technologies, people with physical or mental disabilities are able to expand their range of movement.
Does that apply in the banking sector, too?
Yes, that is one of the biggest advantages of the new technologies.
A lot of changes will be happening here.
That includes things that we can hardly imagine today.
ATMs capable of communicating with blind and visually impaired clients through headsets have been in operation for a few years now.
Our range of online banking services was designed to offer the highest degree of barrier-free accessibility in accordance with national and international standards.
The visually impaired can use aids like screen readers, braille or enlargement software to access our services.
But today, people with physical, sensory or technical limitations can also conduct their banking transactions from anywhere.
Next, it will be possible to open an account via video identification, making the trip into the bank branch unnecessary.
Digitalization has strengthened the international competitiveness of the Swiss financial center even more.
Will it come under even greater pressure as a result?
Maybe, but most of all, it is an unbelievable opportunity.
In a digital, connected world, the path to the client is much shorter.
If we can establish ourselves as a financial center with the best digital services, the banks here can grow much more rapidly than they could have in an analog world.
For centuries, our financial institutions have proven how safe they are and how well they can protect the private sphere.
Those are the qualities that are attractive in the digital world.
Clients want strong data protection and to remain safe from cybercrime.
“I support and advise 300 clients in all areas related to their finances, and I am their first point of contact for all requests.
In recent years, the volume of tasks that a client advisor is responsible for has increased greatly.
Most of all, administrative topics such as documentation and recording client information have taken on greater importance.
And the usual tasks have not diminished either:
quickly implementing investment suggestions, renewing a mortgage as per client request, planning an annual personal consultation, proactively contacting clients on specific occasions.
And yet it is actually possible today to manage a greater administrative effort and still provide better advisory services than 30 years ago.
We have become much more productive compared to then thanks to our digital tools.
My tablet is a great help.
It used to take over an hour to prepare for a client meeting; it took a lot of time to gather and print client documents, product brochures and contract paperwork.
Today, all of the documents are accessible online using my tablet.
I save about a half an hour per meeting in follow-up.
These improvements are attributable to our “66% Client Time” initiative.
Like the name says, the goal is to have more time for the client.
Ultimately, no app and no system can replace personal, analog support.”
Robin Stadler, 31, is a client advisor at the Credit Suisse Aussersihl branch in Zurich.
The future of agriculture:
sensors control the conditions for growing heads of lettuce in vertical farming.
Racks of Lettuce
Japanese electronics companies are searching for new opportunities.
A few have turned their attention to agriculture.
Digitalization is expected to solve the farmers’next-generation problem.
By Sonja Blaschke
Haruyasu Miyabe was concerned when his boss called him into his office three years ago.
Semiconductor manufacturing in the Japanese city of Aizu-Wakamatsu had shrunk from several hundred employees to just a few dozen.
The atmosphere was tense.
From a call center to a data center to fish farming, people had run through many different possible solutions in their heads.
But Miyabe, an electrical engineer who had supervised Fujitsu ’s production there, was completely unprepared for what came next.
“Starting tomorrow, you will be cultivating lettuce,” his boss told him.
They used to monitor computer chips with sensors there, but now they ’ll use them to grow lettuce from seeds in a nutrient solution on 450 floor-to-ceiling racks under LED lights in a huge clean room.
At the start, neither the 52-year-old Miyabe nor his 23 colleagues in the department had any experience growing vegetables, not to mention growing them on shelves in vertical farming.
But they did n’t need any experience.
Why?
Because the actual goal of the lettuce factory was less about growing leafy greens than it was a reality test for selling the company ’s own cloud-based Akisai software, says Fujitsu spokesman Rishad Marquardt.
The software is intended to enable people with little experience to get started in smart agriculture with easy-to-understand graphics and tips – and make farm life more appealing.
Japan ’s farmers are 67 years old on average, and trending older.
In many places, there is no next generation to take over.
By using information technology in agriculture, Fujitsu wants to reduce the burden on farmers and make cultivation more efficient, says Marquardt.
Other electronics giants like Panasonic, Sharp and Toshiba also came across lettuce in their search for new product lines and sales channels.
In recent years, they began digitizing empty factory buildings or transforming them into plantations.
Computers Take on World Hunger The United Nations estimates that the global population will increase from 7 to 9.6 billion people by the year 2050.
The middle class, which has a large budget for food, will see strong growth.
In order to cover rising demand, people around the world are searching for quick, easy-to-implement solutions that are also sustainable.
Future researchers are declaring a tectonic shift from the industrialization of
“If it gets too hot in the greenhouse, the system automatically closes the curtains.”
agriculture 100 years ago to its automation and digitalization today.
Digital fields offer a ray of hope.
They will be able to fight hunger in Africa and reduce labor costs in industrialized nations.
In Japan, they could also replace dwindling numbers of farmers.
The Nomura Research Institute estimates that by 2035, robots could replace almost half of all jobs in Japan in “non-creative” sectors, such as the service industry, merchandise delivery and agriculture.
The experiment is showing initial signs of success.
According to Fujitsu, since its Akisai software first hit the market in 2012, around 400 companies and organizations are now using the software.
While only 79 shops stocked the lowpotassium Fujitsu lettuce back in March 2015, the number had risen to 240 just a year later.
Panasonic, in contrast, is investing in a combination of traditional agriculture and new methods.
Farmers cultivate the soil in smart greenhouses and sow seeds in the traditional way.
While the plants grow, sensors measure the temperature and humidity.
If it gets too hot in the greenhouse, the Panasonic system automatically closes the curtains to keep out the sun and opens windows to let in the breeze, and vice versa when temperatures drop.
The companies noticed that many of their new customers were businesses and organizations that previously had nothing to do with cultivating fruits and vegetables.
Thanks to specialized hardware and software, they can quickly achieve success with relatively few employees and little expertise – regardless of whether they are growing lettuce, tomatoes or strawberries.
One company that has diversified into agriculture is a waste management company, of all things.
Toyama Kankyo Seibi in central Japan processes 300,000 tons of garbage each year and produces pallets from plastic.
Other waste is dumped in landfills or burned.
Only the Pollination Is Natural Over time, supervisors noticed that they were not making use of all of their resources – for example, the heat and steam produced from waste incineration.
Now excess steam is reused in an ingenious system with heat-storing containers and heat exchangers in greenhouses.
Toyama Kankyo Seibi produces the necessary energy itself, approximately 10 million kWh per year.
Currently 85 employees are producing up to 500 tons of tomatoes a year, 1.4 million flowers and also strawberries on a smaller scale.
Their sales comprise around one-seventh of the company ’s total revenue.
Generous funding from the government may also have provided an incentive for the waste management company, which transitioned to large-scale farming in 2015 after 16 years of running it as a smallerscale project.
Two-thirds of the annual operating costs for the horticulture project are covered by the Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which promotes future-oriented agricultural methods.
The local economy is benefiting as well.
Around 70 percent of employees live in Toyama City, with most coming from the surrounding region.
Although some of the employees have experience in agriculture, it is not a prerequisite.
Everything is thought out to the smallest detail in the help of information and communication technology.
Sensors on mobile bases in the greenhouse transmit the data regularly to the monitoring software.
This ensures stable growing conditions, “even without a farmer ’s instinct,” says Masafumi Takata, who works in the greenhouse.
The right temperature, the right humidity – everything is monitored by software.
Takata lifts a vine of tomatoes and shows that the plants are not growing directly in the earth, but rather on special films.
These simulate a lack of water, which stimulates the plant to produce particularly sweet tomatoes.
Sensors test the sugar content.
Only pollination of the plants is left to nature:
200 bees buzz around in each greenhouse.
Meanwhile, this is opening up new perspectives for Japan ’s agricultural industry, which is suffering from a shortage of labor and a dwindling next generation.
By mid-2017, the first robotic factory producing lettuce will open in a 4,400 -squaremeter facility in Kameoka, near Kyoto.
People will only sow the seeds, and industrial robots will take care of the rest.
Within five years, up to half a million pesticide-free heads of lettuce will sprout on the shelves every day.
LED lights were installed to save costs and resources; 98 percent of the water will be reused.
“Our new farm could be a model for other farms, but our aim is not to replace human farmers, but to develop a system where humans and machines work together,” said JJ Price, Spread ’s global marketing manager, to the British newspaper, The Guardian.
Over the short term, digital farming will lead directly to the replacement of human workers who are having problems with the growing complexity of “precision agriculture.”
But before it comes to that, the companies need to solve a few problems such as high energy consumption.
Miyabe, the electrical engineer turned lettuce grower, would prefer not to disclose how high Fujitsu ’s annual electricity bill is for the smart lettuce factory.
Sonja Blaschke is an independent East Asian correspondent and television producer for German language media.
She has lived in Japan since 2005.
Haiti and Uganda:
Little Things That Have a Big Impact
Haiti ’s economy has yet to recover from the 2010 earthquake.
A lack of access to banking services is a major problem for many people who are trying to become financially independent – including farmer August Jean Soliny (photo).
Up to now, he has always had to pay his children ’s school fees in person, which has meant spending a great deal of time traveling.
Financing and purchasing seeds and machinery has also required considerable time and effort.
The global microfinance institution Finca deploys tools like mobile banking and semi-automated credit assessments to give farmers the access they need to financial resources and loans, allowing them to shape their own economic future.
www.finca.org
167 Dollars for Silkworms and Mushrooms The number of people suffering from hunger in Uganda has more than doubled since the 1990s.
The availability of traditional financial services is essential for promoting economic development in the country ’s rural areas.
In 2012, Aidah Nahunkuma received a microcredit of 167 US dollars from Opportunity International.
She used that money to start a now-flourishing business raising silkworms and mushrooms.
The proceeds cover not only the living expenses of her family of eight, but also the costs of the children ’s education.
Opportunity International is making it possible for people to take advantage of banking services with the help of modern technologies.
Aidah Nahunkuma is now able to use a smartphone to conduct mobile payment transactions, so she can make deposits and withdrawals without having to walk for hours to the nearest bank.
www.opportunity.org Credit Suisse provides support for Finca International and Opportunity International as part of its Microfinance Capacity Building Initiative.
www.credit-suisse.com/microfinance
Investing in individuals.
Improving our world.
www.accion.org
This advert was made possible with the generous support of Credit Suisse.
A Formula for Love
Online dating sites promise to find your ideal partner with the help of computer programs.
Can algorithms really predict who will fall in love?
By Christian Heinrich
The story of humankind is the story of love.
Without love there would be no literature or Hollywood as we know them today, and of course no propagation of the species.
According to sociologists, much of human progress can be traced back to someone ’s desire to impress a potential mate.
How much easier it would be if there were a formula for love – and what a market that would open up!
This is the promise of online and mobile dating services.
You register on one of these sites, provide some personal information, and the next thing you know, you ’ve received a list of people who have the potential to be the love of your life.
Is this possible?
Judging from the number of people who participate in online dating, it is clear that many singles are hoping so.
The matchmaking site Parship.
ch has nearly 500,000 members in Switzerland, and the dating app Tinder has 25 million members all over the world.
Every day, 9.6 million Tinder users log on, swiping right (“Let ’s meet”) or left (“Sorry, no”) in response to the photographs of potential partners that appear on the screens of their cell phones.
The key to successful matchmaking, according to these services, is a mathematical algorithm – a formula used to calculate the likelihood that two people will be a good match.
Two Neurotics Are n’t a Good Fit “Matchmaking sites refuse to reveal the details of their algorithms.
We have gained some insight into them, however, and the unfortunate truth is that most algorithms have very little scientific basis,” says Manfred Hassebrauck, a professor of social psychology at the University of Wuppertal and an expert on online dating.
In many cases, the information they gather focuses on personality traits.
“But it has long been clear that similar personalities are not a predictor of a successful relationship; two neurotics wo n’t necessarily be a happy couple,” says Hassebrauck.
What ’s more, there is a tendency to present ourselves in an overly positive light.
After analyzing its customer data, an American dating site discovered that its members were an aver- age of 5 centimeters taller and 20 percent wealthier than the population as a whole.
Psychologist Eli Finkel of Northwestern University published a study that caused something of a stir when it concluded that algorithms are ineffective in matching singles with compatible partners.
The authors found “no compelling evidence” that matching algorithms produce noticeably better results than random encounters.
This is not only because of the often mediocre quality of the algorithms, but also because even the most carefully designed programs are simply incapable of predicting compatibility.
Three main factors play a central role in a long-term relationship:
First, the individual characteristics of the partners – including intelligence and past experience with relationships.
Second, the quality of the interactions between the partners – the ways couples communicate and behave with one another.
Third, the circumstances surrounding the couple – such as health and financial status.
The complexity and diversity that result from these three factors cannot be captured by questions like “Do you like horror movies?”
or “Is neatness important to you?”
or “Do you cook more often than once every other day?”
Most dating services confine themselves to gathering information about personality traits.
Lacking the necessary input, algorithms are incapable of yielding high-quality results.
But more is not necessarily better.
Having too many choices can be a disadvantage, as it can make it difficult to reach a decision.
In the past, people would meet and then get to know each other.
With dating sites, people are first presented with a list of the characteristics of a potential partner, and only then does the user decide whether or not to meet that person.
“Providing access to potential partners via profiles artificially transforms three-dimensional people into two-dimensional displays of information,” as Finkel writes in his study.
Access to large numbers of potential partners and opportunities to compare them may make users less willing to commit to any one individual.
It ’s no wonder that we are seeing signs of a countertrend.
Once, a French app, uses a team of real human matchmakers rather than an algorithm.
“Users receive one potential match per day, with 24 hours to think about it,” says Once founder Jean Meyer.
“You have time to decide whether you ’re interested.”
The next recommendation comes a day later.
If both parties “like” each other, they can connect and start chatting.
Only a few months ago, Once was also launched in Germany and Switzerland.
“This approach helps to prevent choice overload, and that ’s a good thing,” says researcher Hassebrauck, who also provides advice to dating services.
But he believes that it would be a mistake to avoid using computers altogether.
Studies in the 1990s showed that the choices people make for themselves are no more successful than a random selection.
“High-quality algorithms are at least somewhat more likely to produce a successful match,” says Hassebrauck.
Despite the many shortcomings of online dating, nearly all researchers agree on one thing:
These services make it much easier to meet new people.
And that aspect functions extraordinarily well.
According to an independent survey conducted by the Pew Research Center, one in six relationships in the United States now begins online.
Christian Heinrich is a freelance journalist in Germany.
He met his wife offline – at a conference for media professionals.
CREDIT SUISSE
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
2/2016
From Swiss Myth to the Longest Tunnel in the World
Bulletin
075360 E
A clear view...
Gottardo
Comments
Bulletin “Gottardo”, 2/2016
Service
What a Joy to Read As a resident of Hildesheim, I was overjoyed to read the essay “The Saint and the Devil,” featuring Hildesheim ’s own St. Godehard church, in the issue on the opening of the Gotthard base tunnel.
The apse paintings of the church, which was elevated to a basilica by Pope Paul VI, portray Judgment Day from the Book of Matthew, calling on people to be prepared and vigilant.
Unfortunately, the photo of the statue of St. Godehard featured in the magazine does not do justice to the effect the statue has on visitors.
Positioned at the transept of the church, it draws the eye of visitors as they exit the building.
Manfred Glombik, Hildesheim, Germany
I Could n’t Put it Down Congratulations on a marvelous issue.
Everything ’s perfect:
articles, photos, graphics, layout.
I even read some articles more than once, so that I ’d be sure to remember everything in them.
Leo Thums, Kleinandelfingen
One Topic from Various Angles I ’ve found your approach of looking at a single topic from a variety of perspectives to be exciting, educational and enlightening.
Hans Christen, Reichenburg
Forty Years Thank you for the “Gotthard” issue.
I ’ve been reading Bulletin for over 40 years, and I look forward to every new issue.
Dr. Peter Bratzel, Stutensee, Germany
An Oldie AND a Goodie!
Your publication is not only the oldest banking magazine in the world; it is in my opinion also the best (and I receive quite a few).
My partner, a graphic designer, also enjoys the magazine for the excellent graphics and layout.
You can be sure that I ’ll continue to read Bulletin in the future.
Urs Geppert, Zurich
Subscribe to Credit Suisse Bulletin for free
Write an email with your address to:
abo.bulletin@credit-suisse.com
We welcome all letters from readers.
The editors reserve the right to select and edit the letters.
Write to us at:
Email:
bulletin@abk.ch Address:
Credit Suisse AG, Bulletin Editorial Team, HTG, CH-8070 Zurich
Follow us!
www.twitter.com/creditsuisse www.facebook.com/creditsuisse www.youtube.com/creditsuisse www.flickr.com/creditsuisse
Archive Back issues of Bulletin are available digitally:
www.credit-suisse.com/bulletin
Publishing details:
Published by:
Credit Suisse AG, project management:
Christoph G. Meier, Mandana Razavi, contributors:
Jessica Cunti, Schirin Razavi, Yanik Schubiger, Simon Staufer, content design, editing:
Ammann, Brunner&amp;Krobath AG (www.abk.ch), design concept, layout, production:
Crafft Kommunikation AG (www.crafft.ch), photo editing:
Studio Andreas Wellnitz, Berlin, pre-press:
n c ag (www.ncag.ch), printer:
Stämpfli AG, circulation:
110,000
Editorial committee:
Oliver Adler, Felix Baumgartner, Thomas Beyeler, René Buholzer, Béatrice Fischer, André Helfenstein, Anja Hochberg, Markus Kleeb, Carsten Luther, Jean-Luc Rochat, Manuel Rybach, Robert Wagner
PERFORMANCE neutral Printed Matter
No. 01- 16- 101081 – www.myclimate.org © myclimate – The Climate Protection Partnership Credit Suisse
# youthbarometer# 2016
Photo:
Jonathan Alcorn/Reuters
A major survey targeting the US, Brazil, Singapore and.
Contents
# 1 Politics Online The Internet makes politics more exciting.
Concerns about terrorism.
Declining confidence.
— p.
55
# 2 Communication Digital is not the same as global:
the regional differences.
Online bullying is becoming more widespread.
— p.
58
# Roundtable How do e-politics work?
A discussion with Flavia Kleiner, Lukas Reimann and Otfried Jarren.
— p.
60
# 3 Trends and Media Mobile phones and apps are in, drugs and clubs are out.
— p.
65
Generation Stress?
– The world belongs to the young, goes the saying.
Looking at the results of the 2016 Credit Suisse Youth Barometer, however, this feeling of freedom does n’t really emerge.
Instead, today ’s 16- 25-year-olds give the impression of being “Generation Stress.”
The young people surveyed in Switzerland, Brazil, Singapore and the US want to have it all:
a career, but with a good work-life balance; to be independent and to work at an international company; to save less, but also own their own home.
And no matter what they are doing, they are always online, communicating with each other, gaming and discovering new platforms – Snapchat is this year ’s superstar.
We have made the focus of the survey “Politics Online,” fitting for the politically active times.
The first chapter and the main feature discussion with politicians Flavia Kleiner (Operation Libero) and Lukas Reimann (SVP) and Professor Otfried Jarren (University of Zurich) are dedicated to this topic.
US sociologist Sherry Turkle also talks about digital developments.
She has concerns about the smartphone generation, which is mired in a state of “attentional disarray.”
Your editorial team
# 4 Job, Finances and Career Home ownership and stocks instead of a savings account.
People want independence and a home office.
— p.
67
# Interview Professor Sherry Turkle warns against too much online and smartphone time.
— p.
69
USA (US) Brazil (BR) Switzerland (CH) The 2016 Credit Suisse Youth Barometer surveyed some 1,000 young people between the ages of 16 and 25 in the United States, Brazil, Singapore and Switzerland.
The gfs.
bern research firm conducted the survey online between April and June 2016.
The Youth Barometer is commissioned by Credit Suisse and has been compiled annually since 2010.
The editorial team (Simon Brunner) analyzed the results for Bulletin; Timo Meyer provided the illustrations.
This dossier contains the survey ’s most important and interesting findings, as well as expert analysis.
You can see the complete study at
# youthbarometer www.credit-suisse.com/youthbarometer Singapore (SG)
Photo:
Bernd Jonkmanns/laif/Keystone
# 1 Politics Online
# youthbarometer# 2016
The Internet makes politics more personal and more engaging – but information can be manipulated.
Worries about terrorism and health care are up.
Confidence is somewhat down.
The past year has been a time of intense political activity, particularly in the four countries studied.
Elections in Singapore (September 2015), elections in Switzerland (October 2015), impeachment proceedings again President Rousseff in Brazil, and the presidential campaigns in the United States.
Despite the wide differences in national issues and circumstances, for the past several years politicians all around the world have had one form of communication in common.
More and more, politicians are using the Internet and social media to get their messages across.
But are they reaching the youngest members of the electorate?
And are the messages well received?
A majority of young people in the countries surveyed welcome the opportunity to discuss and comment on political issues online.
They see this as beneficial to politics in their country.
With the exception of Switzerland, there is broad agreement with the statement “Comments on Facebook, Twitter and other social media make politics more relevant and more engaging, motivating me to become more politically active.”
Survey respondents also indicate that the Internet and social media have brought politics and economics closer to the people:
“Because of online posts and comments, organizations and companies pay more attention to what people really want.”
More than
82% of those surveyed in Brazil believe that online posts/comments have been beneficial to politics.
US 58% SG 70%
CH 50%
62 percent of those surveyed in the United States, Brazil and Singapore agree; only the Swiss are less convinced (51 percent).
Perhaps the Swiss feel that they have sufficient opportunities to make their opinions known in their country ’s many elections and referendums.
A large majority of respondents worldwide are aware that posts on Facebook, Twitter and the like can be manipulated.
It is possible that content on Facebook and Twitter is sometimes manipulated.
US 58% BR 66% SG 70% CH 70%
Comments on Facebook, Twitter and other social media are honest and unadulterated.
US 47% BR 42% SG 52% CH 19%
# 1.1 Politics Online
Engaging, transparent …
except for the trolls!
Comments on Facebook, Twitter and other social media make politics more relevant and engaging.
Because of online posts and comments, organizations and companies pay more attention to what people really want.
There are trolls who only want to provoke and offend with their online comments and posts.
76 84 74 88 0 Agreement in percent 100
US BR SG CH
# youthbarometer# 2016
Conversely, only a minority (except in Singapore) believe that these posts are honest and not fraudulent.
Here, the Swiss are especially critical.
Only 19 percent believe that people present their true selves on social media.
Everyone is familiar with trolls who only want to provoke and offend, rather than to contribute honestly to online conversation (more on the relationship between politics and the Internet in the roundtable discussion on page 60).
The Internet aside, what do young people see as their country ’s greatest problems?
Particularly in Brazil, there is a range of problems that have raised concern for years.
In 2016, more than two-thirds of 16- to 25-year-olds identify corruption and unemployment as major problems.
No other country
In 2010, 13% believed terrorism was a problem in Switzerland.
Today, it is
23%.
demonstrates such consensus.
Unemployment is a major problem in all the countries, ranking among the top five problems in three countries; in Switzerland, 21 percent identify it as the biggest problem.
Among all adults surveyed by the Credit Suisse Worry Barometer, unemployment has been a high-ranking issue for years (see www.credit-suisse.com/worrybarometer)
In the United States, Brazil and Singapore there are growing concerns about health care, particularly about health insurance premiums.
In Switzerland, this issue does not even crack the top 10.
For years, a different social benefit has been a source of concern:
the AHV system of state retirement provision, currently in third place.
Despite all of these concerns, young people are confident about the future – if somewhat less so than in years past.
It is n’t surprising that Swiss young people are the most optimistic (59 percent), but even a majority of young Brazilians (54 percent) continue to believe that their future is bright.
In 2010, however, 67 percent of young Brazilians responded affirmatively.
In the United States, a narrow majority have consistently agreed with this sentiment.
In Singapore, just under half of the young people surveyed agree.
# 1.2 The Biggest Problems
What concerns young people
80 74 → 67 ↗
In 2012, the situation in Brazil was perceived as less dire:
corruption 50%, unemployment 43%.
# 1.3 Attitudes About the Future
Confidence edges downward
44 ↘ 32 → 28 28 ↗ → 26 ↘ Unemployment Terrorism Health Care Xenophobia Corruption
32 ↗ 27 27 → ↗ Corruption Unemployment Inflation Health Care Crime
38 ↗ 37 → 33 ↗ 31 → 27 ↘ Terrorism Inflation Health Care Unemployment Wages
46 ↗ 45 44 ↘ → Refugees/Asylum Foreigners/Immigration State Retirement Provision 26 → 24 → Environment Racism
US Brazil Singapore Switzerland 2010 2016
“This list contains some topics that have recently received a great deal of attention.
Please look at the whole list, then select the five issues that you personally see as the biggest problems in your country.”
, in percent “What do you think your future will look like?”
Response “reasonably confident,” in percent
US BR SG CH
# youthbarometer# 2016
Dissatisfaction is high in Brazil.
Pictured:
protests against President Rousseff on Copacabana beach in Rio de Janeiro (April 2016).
Young people in the United States are concerned about unemployment, terrorism and health care.
Pictured:
participants at a rally for presidential candidate Donald Trump in Iowa in January 2016.
Photos:
Lianne Milton/Panos Pictures; Mark Peterson/Redux/laif
# 2
# youthbarometer# 2016
Communication
Few people like to be offline.
Digital does n’t necessarily mean global – significant regional differences.
Snapchat Superstar.
Many young people have experienced cyberbullying.
25%
Few young people consider being offline “in” and actually go offline:
US 18%, BR 19%,
SG 19%, CH 25%.
If you want to learn about young people, you have to look at how they communicate.
Not surprisingly, only one-quarter of young people in Switzerland and nearly one-fifth in the US, Brazil and Singapore consider it socially acceptable to be offline and actually “log off” for a while.
One reason may be that young people have traditionally always been afraid of missing out on something interesting, now referred to colloquially as FOMO (fear of missing out) by young people.
A deeper reason might be that the young people surveyed do n’t even distinguish between online and offline.
The generation born after 1990 does n’t know a world without the internet.
As a result, for them the real world and the digital world are one.
An example is the mobile app game Pokémon Go (photo below).
Capturing virtual characters in the real world only seems strange to parents.
Smartphones dominate the lives of our survey participants.
Pictured:
Young people playing Pokémon Go on Casinoplatz Square in Bern, Switzerland (June 2016).
Photo:
Lukas Lehmann/Keystone
# youthbarometer# 2016
Across the board, the Youth Barometer shows that there are huge differences between the countries surveyed, although the digital world knows no borders and the term is often used interchangeably with global.
This is especially clear with respect to communication.
While text messaging (SMS) continues to gain popularity in the US and Singapore, only a minority of people text in Brazil and Switzerland.
That is due in part to the fact that WhatsApp (interestingly, an American app), never really took off in the US because texting has almost always been free.
WhatsApp is the go-to app in Switzerland and Brazil, on the other hand.
Facebook plays a growing number of roles in young people ’s lives.
Facebook Messenger is among the top communication platforms in all of the countries surveyed (fourth in Singapore).
The social network is also used for news and has been considered “in” for years (see chapter 3 for details).
WhatsApp is also part of the Facebook group, which reports the following user numbers:
Facebook:
1.6 billion active members per month, WhatsApp:
900 million, Messenger:
800 million.
In closing, some less pleasant news:
Many young people have had negative experiences while communicating online.
A troubling number of respondents in the US (40 percent), Brazil (25 percent), Singapore
39%
Bullying on Facebook is widespread:
US 40%,
BR 25%, SG 33%,
CH 39%.
(33 percent) and Switzerland (39 percent) indicated that they had been harassed or outright bullied on Facebook.
The number has increased dramatically in Switzerland, up from only 11 percent reporting such experiences in 2010.
This could be one reason why other social media networks (WhatsApp, Snapchat, Facebook Messenger) have gained in popularity in recent years, as users have more control over who can read what and reply compared to Facebook ’s timeline.
# 2.1 Contacting Friends
Texting Popular Only in the US
# 2.2 Trends
Snapchat Superstar
US SMS/texting Mobile phone 43 Facebook 37
Snapchat is a mobile messaging and imagesharing app from the US that focuses on photos and videos, which self-destruct shortly after they ’ve been viewed (and ca n’t be saved).
Brazil WhatsApp Facebook Mobile phone 41
Previous year 5
Singapore WhatsApp/chat service SMS/texting 43 Mobile phone 31
US
Brazil
Switzerland WhatsApp Mobile phone Facebook 13
0 100 Singapore Switzerland
“What do you use to communicate with your friends?”
Combined share of “most important” and “second-most important” media, in percent “How long do you use the following media on an average day for personal purposes?”
Percentage responding “at least 1 – 2 hours”
US BR SG CH
# Roundtable
Politics is fascinating.
Pictured:
The traditional youth session in the National Council Chamber in Bern, on Saturday, August 29, 2015.
“Social media is like a playground”
Two politicians and a journalism professor discuss the Youth Barometer ’s findings on the role of social media in the political process, e-voting and the US election.
By Simon Brunner and Michael Krobath
Photo:
Lukas Lehmann/Keystone
# youthbarometer# 2016
Do the Internet and social media already play a relevant role in Swiss politics today?
FLAVIA KLEINER (FK) Yes, I would say their relevance is growing all the time.
But there is still plenty of room for improvement.
LUKAS REIMANN (LR) You ’re right about that, but these days social media is already reaching different and significantly more people than traditional word of mouth.
Moreover, unlike communication via traditional media, it allows a much more intensive dialogue with the public.
And it enables the direct mobilization of voters.
You can make a targeted address to supporters on a specific topic.
That is much more direct than a newspaper interview.
OTFRIED JARREN (OJ) I think that social media can influence and shape public opinion, especially when it comes to setting the agenda and with its rapid response to events.
To what extent does an e-campaign differ from a traditional campaign?
LR There are fewer direct debates between political opponents.
The campaign concentrates too much on mobilizing and activating its own sympathizers.
This means candidates are preaching to the converted.
FK The communication and speed are different, and content must be ported more trenchantly.
Political campaigns on social media are a 24/7 opportunity.
But anyone who thinks they can do this just a little bit on the side between stops at the podium and hanging up posters would be better off leaving it alone.
Only 19 percent of young people in Switzerland believe that Facebook, Twitter and online blogs are honest.
70 percent believe these channels can be manipulated.
What does this low level of credibility mean for politics and politicians?
OJ Social media ’s potential for manipulation and low level of credibility in the area of political information are making politicians aware of the major importance of the traditional mass media, especially the SRG channels, as well as the press.
Another area of the Youth Barometer shows that young people trust Swiss radio and TV, NZZ and Tages-Anzeiger (Swiss publications) the most.
Independence and journalistic professionalism are important features for social communication and differentiate it from personal or group communication.
LR As a politician, it puts my mind at ease that young people are so skeptical.
It is much easier to manipulate people online than in other political arenas, for example by purchasing likes or providing anonymous comments.
It ’s a positive thing that young people have recognized this …
FK …
And it reminds us that true credibility is a problem everywhere in life.
We should all fight this problem online by expressing ourselves with authenticity.
88 percent of those surveyed believe there are many trolls online who only want to be provocative and have a negative impact.
How do we manage to have an objective and civil discussion in spite of this?
FK Anyone who lets trolls control the field has already lost.
There are two things that help against trolls, and only in combination:
facts and follower power.
We deployed people from Operation Libero – sympathizers with our movement – to search through social
“Like in real life, there are plenty of strong interest groups online, too.”
Otfried Jarren media and give fact-based answers to trolls, counter their false statements, speak in clear language, but never turn impolite.
LR The trolls’complete lack of restraint is at times extremely fierce due to their presumed anonymity.
On the other hand, you ca n’t ignore them completely:
They ’re also a barometer for the real public mood and people ’s innermost convictions.
For that reason, you have to pay attention to them, as unpleasant as it may be – especially for politicians.
Only 35 percent of young Swiss people believe that Facebook, Twitter or online comments help uncover conspiracies in powerful companies, the government or the military.
That number is much higher in the US, Brazil and Singapore.
Why?
OJ It ’s an interesting phenomenon.
Presumably, social media users are becoming increasingly aware that common goals cannot be pursued over the long term there either – only the goals of certain groups, at best.
As in real life, there are plenty of strong interest groups online, too!
FK Although social media is global, it always needs to be seen in a local context as well.
It is used in some other countries far more intensively – and more politically – than here in Switzerland.
In South America this may be the most appropriate place to express your opinion:
Politics there is becoming an online happening and an online statement.
For example, people in Venezuela posted pictures of their ink-covered thumbs to show that they had voted.
The political and media work on social media is lagging somewhat behind in Switzerland.
LR At the same time, the diversity of opinions has certainly become more developed via the Internet in the US, Brazil and Singapore than in Switzerland.
Here we already had a wide variety of citizen initiatives before the Internet age thanks to the direct democracy and popular initiatives, and small groups were also able to have a large impact.
A growing number of young people report bullying on Facebook.
In 2011 it was 11 percent, with that number growing to 39 percent by 2016.
Does the government need to play a bigger role here?
FK Social media is just as real a place as a playground, and any bullying here needs to be judged accordingly.
The government can shed light on it and judge punishable actions.
But I also think that the community needs to play an important role here – just like in real life.
Public pressure,
# youthbarometer# 2016 friends and NGOs need to reprimand troublemakers and demand civility.
LR That ’s similar to how I see it.
The government should not become the Internet police and issue fines for Facebook posts.
But shedding light on the subject is important.
And criminally relevant posts should be reported, of course.
OJ I assume that social rules and norms will establish themselves through the interventions of users and by the market, because providers want “satisfied” users, after all.
However, there is a massive conflict of norms, for example, when providers are liable in American culture and are active in European markets.
Forms of co-regulation make sense, meaning the cooperation of independent regulatory agencies in developing the rules and norms as well as their implementation.
There also needs to be a legal framework.
Private companies do not want to submit to any public entities, but there is a lack of entities for self-regulation.
In this sense, the government needs to act.
“The government should not become the Internet police and issue fines for Facebook posts.”
Lukas Reimann
Can the Internet bring a younger electorate back to the ballot box?
FK Absolutely.
Part of young people ’s lives now plays out in social media.
Therefore, we need to collect these potential voters right at that point of contact, pursue new communication channels and prepare content that is suitable for social media.
Furthermore, we need to be aware that interaction is what counts in social media.
There is no one-way communication as is often the case with political work.
LR And you need to speak young people ’s language to reach them.
The Easyvote app is a good example.
It simplifies politics and makes it easy to CH:
Top Problems
Developments that cause the greatest concern
Refugees/asylum seekers Foreigners/immigration AHV/state retirement provision Environmental protection 26 29 Racism Terrorism 13 Unemployment* Youth unemployment* 17 12 Social security 16 15 22 24 22 21 23 EU/bilateral agreements 16 11 0 50
“This list contains some topics that have recently received a great deal of attention.
Please look at the whole list, then select from the list the five points that you personally see as the five biggest problems in Switzerland.”
, in percent
* Up to and including 2014, unemployment and youth unemployment were surveyed together.
Accordingly, the older value for youth unemployment (12%) dates from 2015.
understand while explaining things in a neutral and factual way – making voting easier for young people.
OJ In my opinion, there is a wide variety of reasons for participating or not participating in elections and voting, and all of them have to do with the media.
The political institution system with its intermediaries has to be present in everyday politics.
But this is rapidly changing.
Swiss parties in particular are clearly having problems with acceptance.
Is social media truly so important in the US election, or is it just media hype?
LR Selling Obama as a social media star was a clever aspect of his presidential campaign.
But the billions in support were not donated online.
Candidates who were not previously well known – like Ron Paul – were able to heavily expand their influence thanks to social media.
Should e-voting be introduced?
LR Only for Swiss nationals abroad!
The opportunities for manipulation are too great, and the system is not yet mature.
Time and again there are serious problems in other countries, which could destroy people ’s trust in democracy.
FK I ’m following the efforts in Estonia and some communities in Switzerland with great interest, but I have n’t made up my mind yet.
OJ E-voting requires institutional trust.
Political institutions also live from their visibility, from collective records, and act through their immediacy.
They are in no way anonymous.
This is the hallmark of a democratic system.
Is the Internet producing a new, louder, more simplistic type of politician?
OJ Hardly.
But there have always been personalities who have tried and continue to try to define the political issues.
However, setting the agenda in no way means influencing how political decisions are being made.
Moreover, the diversity of channels is once again reducing the visibility of individual statements.
LR It ’s true that there have always been politicians in the analog world, too, who were louder than everyone else.
But Internet-savvy politicians often
# youthbarometer# 2016 recognize people ’s real problems faster and more precisely than those who discount the importance of the Internet.
If they make something of that, it can give them a decisive advantage.
FK Clearly social media rewards those users who attract attention.
However,
“There is no oneway communication with social media as is often the case with political work.”
Flavia Kleiner
I ’m convinced that you can also attract attention with good political communication that is brief, catchy and honest.
Since 2010, the Credit Suisse Youth Barometer has worked to determine the top ten problems in Switzerland as young people see them (see graphic, left).
What stands out for you?
LR Immigration, a lack of integration and foreign infiltration are ongoing issues for young people – and rightfully so – and they are in the spotlight even more now.
Young people experience these problems close up and personal:
in school, in public transportation, when they go out or search for an apprenticeship.
Many young people do n’t understand why the majority of government does n’t respond with a more restrictive policy on foreigners and immigrants.
OJ The concerns vary in accordance with the major themes on the political agenda.
The shifts reveal that the political climate and current affairs are being recognized.
At the same time, there are topics that remain on the problem agenda.
People respond rather pragmatically to some of the heated “problem” topics in the political system, like the EU, refugees, immigration and foreigners.
FK I ’ve noticed that people continue to regard retirement provision as a major problem, and the medium and long-term financing of our state retirement provision is in fact at risk.
It ’s obvious that we need to develop reasonable proposals quickly.
Aside from that, I have noticed that European issues are no longer central – perhaps because young people have grown up with the benefits of living in Switzerland in the midst of Europe and are not fully aware of the current threat to this achievement.
OTFRIED JARREN (OJ), 62, is a journalism professor and head of the Media&amp;Politics department at the University of Zurich and President of the Swiss Media Commission.
Jarren has published several books and essays on journalism and the media.
LUKAS REIMANN (LR), 33, is an attorney, Member of the National Council (Swiss People ’s Party), Member of the National Council Legal Committee and President of the Campaign for an Independent and Neutral Switzerland (AUNS).
In addition, he works at a law firm in Wil, Canton of St. Gallen.
Social media posts (per day) 0 – 1 — 1 – 2
Photo:
Manuel Lopez/Keystone; Private archive (2)
Communication split
Texting Facebook Messenger WhatsApp Phone Email
Texting Phone WhatsApp Email
Phone Facebook Messenger WhatsApp Texting Email
Nothing is more “in” than mobile phones.
Pictured:
A girl poses at the “Future World” art exhibit in Singapore in March 2016.
Photo:
Wallace Woon/epa/Keystone
# 3 Trends and Media
# youthbarometer# 2016
Mobile phones and apps are in, drugs and clubs are out.
Radio is becoming less important.
SRF, NZZ, Tages-Anzeiger news sources are more trusted than social media.
Young people have always defined themselves through what is in and out – by being involved or not.
And the Internet has strengthened this dichotomy even further:
Like or thumbs up if you like it.
Withhold the Like or thumbs down if you do n’t.
The Youth Barometer examines these trends.
Anything to do with smartphones is in.
This even takes first place in Singapore and
This is what the “in” ranking list looked like for Switzerland in 2010:
1.
Texting 2.
Italian food 3.
Email 4.
Vacationing abroad 5.
Being yourself the US, and second place in Switzerland.
WhatsApp, Facebook and YouTube are often cited – all platforms that can or must be used as smartphone apps.
Nowadays mobile phones without Internet service and landlines are out – these are both obvious.
But drugs, smoking and performance-enhancing substances are also out.
Parents should be happy about that.
However, various social associations like youth organizations and political parties are often unpopular, especially in Singapore and Switzerland.
The declining importance of traditional religion is expressed directly in the question:
“Which religion do you belong to?”
Between 22 percent and 34 percent of the young people in the four countries being surveyed describe themselves now as agnostic/atheist/unaffiliated with any religion.
Just two years ago it was between 5 percent and 13 percent.
The media behavior of young people is more differentiated than one would generally assume.
Take Switzerland as an
# 3.1 Trends
Digital is in, joining clubs and drugs are out
“We have compiled a list of very different things in life.
Please tell us whether these things are in or out for you and your friends, and also whether you use them.”
, in percent
In
Out
100 95 95 91 93 90 82 83 83 85 80 82 79 74 74 76 73 75 72 73 69 Smartphones Email Television TV series Facebook YouTube WhatsApp Facebook Getting together with friends Going to the movies Smartphones WhatsApp YouTube Facebook Email WhatsApp Smartphones Getting together with friends YouTube Vacationing abroad Mobile phones without Internet 52 Smoking Landline phones Drugs 46 46 51 Performance-enhancing substances Drugs Orkut Smoking Mobile phones without Internet Performance-enhancing substances 67 73 73 76 45 59 Smoking Political parties LGBT community Youth organizations Military Mobile phones without Internet 81 Drugs Religion Skateboarding Youth organizations 47 47 47 46 49 53 55 58 60
US BR SG CH
# youthbarometer# 2016 example.
Free newspapers are still the most important medium for news consumption for 62 percent of young people aged 16 to 25.
But 75 percent chose this answer in 2010.
Competition from online news sites and news apps is becoming fiercer.
In the case of “20 Minuten” and “Blick am Abend” (news sites), it is just a matter of switching media:
Instead of reading a print newspaper, people read the articles online.
Not surprisingly, television has lost popularity over the last six years.
What ’s interesting, though, is that radio ’s popularity has also declined for the first time.
For years, around half of those surveyed in Switzerland answered that they listened to radio.
Now only 42 percent answer yes.
One explanation could be the rise of streaming services that allow people to put together their own music channel.
This trend was not seen in the other countries, but radio never had the same importance in those countries as in Switzerland.
Facebook is increasingly becoming a news channel:
In 2010 only 35 percent of young people used it as such.
Now that figure has risen to 47 percent.
Readily available media products like free newspapers are popular among those surveyed.
This does not mean, however, that they are not quality conscious.
When asked which media sources they trust, SRF, “NZZ” and “Tages-Anzeiger” (Swiss newspapers) top the list.
Digital-only channels are at the bottom of the ranking list:
YouTube, Facebook and Twitter.
34%
Many describe themselves as agnostic/atheist/unaffiliated with any religion:
US 34%, BR 28%,
SG 29%, CH 22%.
# 3.2 CH:
Information About Current Events
Facebook is becoming a news channel
# 3.3 CH:
Trust in the Media
Conscious of tradition
SRF 88 “NZZ” 69 “Tages-Anzeiger” 67
Free newspapers
Internet:
News sites/newspaper sites Television News apps Facebook Radio
Facebook 14 Twitter 9 YouTube 27
Paid daily newspapers
“How do you find out about current events?”
, in percent
“How much do you trust the following information sources?”
, first and last three, in percent
US BR SG CH
# 4
# youthbarometer# 2016
Jobs, Finances and Careers
Home ownership and stocks instead of a savings account.
Career:
People want independence and a home office.
Home ownership is important, especially for women.
The tough economic environment in recent years has left its mark.
In every country, home ownership is people ’s greatest desire when it comes to financial matters.
This could have to do with a growing need for financial security and/or low interest rates.
Mortgages are “cheap,” and investing money profitably elsewhere has become more difficult.
Another result supports this theory as well.
When 16- to 25-year-olds were asked what they would do if they were given 10,000 units of their national currency, they replied that they would put far less of it in their savings account than in 2015.
In the US it was 1,338 USD less; in Singapore, 1,536 SGD less; in Brazil, 1,483 BRL less; and 98 CHF less in Switzerland.
In every country, the largest portion of the money would still go into savings, but other things have become more important:
Saving for a house (US, SG), buying stocks and investments (US, BR, SG), going on vacation (BR, SG, CH) and investing in the family (US, BR, SG).
The debt level in Switzerland shows another major change.
More young people state that they are behind on payments to a mobile network provider.
Last year it was 3 percent, rising to 7 percent this year.
That number has more than doubled, but it is still small in comparison to other countries:
US 20 percent, BR 28 percent, SG 19 percent.
However, this type of debt has increased more in Switzerland than in any other country, while at the same time 33 percent of those surveyed stated that their financial obligations were a major or very major burden (12 percentage points more than 2013).
When it comes to ideas about professions and dream jobs, the success stories of Mark Zuckerberg and other start-up millionaires and billionaires seem to have heavily influenced young people.
When asked who their ideal employer would be, many say they would like to be self-employed – except in Switzerland.
Perhaps that ’s because Switzerland (currently) has a lack of these role models, or they stay out of the public eye.
94% would like to own their own home in Brazil
US 89% SG 91% CH 83%
# 4.1 Finances
Put less in their savings account in USD/BRL/SGD/CHF
US
Brazil
Singapore
Switzerland
Comparison 2015
“Let ’s say someone gives you 10,000 units of your currency.
How would you allocate the money?”
Answer “put it in my savings account”
# 4.2 CH:
Financial Obligations
Debt is a growing burden
Financial burden Liabilities Mobile phone debt
“Are financial obligations a burden in your life?”
, combined answers “large” and “very large burden”, in percent
“Do you personally have financial liabilities to mobile phone service providers?”
, in percent
US BR SG CH
# youthbarometer# 2016
Demand is growing for opportunities to work from home:
US +6 percentage points (pp) since 2010, Brazil +15 pp, Switzerland +14 pp. Only in Singapore has demand remained constant, but it was already at the highest level of all countries surveyed.
Interestingly, there is little difference here between the genders.
If we consider the results on jobs and employers, we could conclude that young people are on the search for a flexible, modern, international job.
When asked what they aim to achieve in life, young people give a long list of goals – some of which are not easily compatible.
The following items score 50 percent or higher in all of the countries:
maintaining a good work-life balance, following their own dreams, home ownership, making use of their talents, trying out and discovering many different things, pursuing a career, having a family with children, getting to know many countries and cultures.
If we look at these goals differentiated by gender, two facts leap out at us:
In all of the countries, home ownership is more important to women than men.
By contrast, men in all of those countries more often list “being a VIP” as a goal.
# 4.3 CH:
Employment Preference
The job hit parade
1 Google
2 SBB
3 Novartis
4 Roche
5 Credit Suisse
6 Apple
7 Migros
8 Schools
9 UBS
10 Federal government
11 Nestlé
12 Hospitals
# 4.4 All Countries:
Life Goals
We want it all!
Maintaining a good work-life balance Following their dreams Home ownership Making use of their talents Trying out and discovering many different things 72 Pursuing a career Having a family with children Getting to know many countries and cultures 59 0 100 65 72 70 79 81 82
&gt; 50%
More than half of those surveyed in all of the countries are pursuing these life goals.
“Off the top of your head, which Swiss company would you like to work for the most?”
“When you think about your life goals, what do you want to achieve?”
Combined responses “definitely want to achieve” and “probably want to achieve,” in percent
US BR SG CH
# youthbarometer# 2016
Interview
“We are in attentional disarray”
Although we are continually connected online, we have lost the ability to talk to one another, says sociologist Sherry Turkle.
She was one of the first researchers to study digital culture.
Today, she takes a critical view of the impact of increasing connectedness.
by Helene Laube
Ms. Turkle, according to the Youth Barometer, 54 percent of 16- to 25-year-olds in the US feel closer to their online community than to US society (49 percent) or to a religious community (40 percent).
What do you make of this finding?
This result is a natural outgrowth of the positive side of being able to stay in touch via social media if other forms of connection are allowed to atrophy.
The challenge, I think, is to increasingly focus on using social media to enhance the ties of face-to-face encounters in our communities, to make that a priority.
Why?
We assume that encounters on social media do the emotional and social work that face-to-face encounters can do.
But we make this assumption at our risk.
We do not feel the same sense of commitment and responsibility for people we know only online.
You can feel affiliated or close to a group, that is, you share their beliefs and are proud to associate with them, but do not feel responsible for the other members.
Photo:
Valentin Flauraud/Keystone
In all of the countries surveyed, except Brazil, respondents said they were responsible for their own online security and safety.
Does that mean they have a greater sense of responsibility than we give them credit for?
Young people know that they are responsible because nobody else is
Young people should turn off their phones once in a while and share real-life experiences, says Professor Turkle.
Pictured:
Festivalgoers at Paléo in Nyon, Switzerland, in July 2015.
# youthbarometer# 2016 paying attention or assuming responsibility.
But that does not mean that they are acting responsibly.
We know they are often not.
For example, drivers can say they should n’t text while driving, that is, that car manufacturers are not responsible for automatically disabling the phones of the person driving the car.
But that does n’t mean drivers actually behave responsibly and do n’t text and drive.
You were an early and influential advocate of computer-mediated communication.
You ’ve become more skeptical in recent years.
What happened?
One development, in particular, was central to the evolution in my thinking.
In the early days we had to go to our computers when we wanted to pursue our online lives for a certain amount of time.
Now we have our phones – they are always on and they are always on us.
We are essentially always online.
We are always dividing our attention between the people we can reach on our phones and the people we are with in person.
We are in attentional disarray.
What effects of this attentional disarray concern you most?
Where to begin?
Our phones constantly interrupt us and interfere with our capacity for solitude.
But we need to be alone every now and then.
In solitude, we find ourselves, we prepare ourselves to come to conversations ready to hear who other people really are, not just who we would like or need them to be.
Most respondents in the Youth Barometer study said that – outside of school or work – they spend at least two hours a day online.
They do n’t want to be alone.
The capacity for solitude is a necessary step on the path to empathy.
We have to be content with ourselves in order be able to hear what other people have to say.
Solitude is also a necessary virtue because it is on the path to self-reflection.
When we learn to listen to other people, it teaches us to listen to ourselves.
Our conversations with others advance self-reflection, the “conversations with ourselves” that are the cornerstone for development but that continue throughout life.
And this development is disrupted by our mobile devices?
Absolutely.
We are at a point where we have come to think of life as a kind of steady “feed,” a flow of information, text messages, emails, chat, photos, videos, Facebook posts, Tweets and Instagrams.
We have become increasingly intolerant of solitude.
Indeed, recent research shows that people are uncomfortable if left alone with their thoughts for as little as six minutes.
In one recent experiment, college students were asked to sit alone without their phones for fifteen minutes.
The study participants were asked, before the study began, if they ever considered giving themselves an electroshock to break the boredom.
They said absolutely not.
They would even pay to avoid a shock.
But in a period of fifteen minutes alone without a device, 67 percent of men and 25 percent of women who said they would never shock themselves had begun to do just that, rather than spend those minutes with their own thoughts.
Did the results of the experiment surprise you?
Not really.
We all see that when people are alone in the checkout line at the supermarket or at a red light – they almost panic and reach for a device.
And here is where the problem starts:
When we struggle to pay attention to ourselves, we struggle to pay attention to each other.
Data Protection
Who is responsible?
I am.
Internet use
Surf, surf, repeat
US Brazil Singapore Switzerland
Everyone for themselves
Providers of Internet-based services
Internet providers
Providers of Internet-based services
Internet providers
Companies
Everyone for themselves
Providers of Internet-based services
Internet providers
Everyone for themselves
Schools/training facilities
State/politics
Online more than two hours each day for personal reasons 46 CH 52 SG 69 BR 58 US
“How important do you consider the role of the following institutions in protecting individuals and their personal data?”
, in percent
“On a typical day, do you spend more than two hours on the Internet for personal reasons?”
, in percent
# youthbarometer# 2016
Photo:
Peter Urban
Is this particularly pronounced in adolescents, since they ’ve grown up with digital devices?
The toll that digital devices are taking on adolescents is not different from the toll it is taking on all of us.
The crisis of attention has led to a crisis in empathy.
But do n’t adolescents have a different relationship with digital devices?
Adolescents are perhaps a special category, because they have grown up with this technology.
They have never known a world without it.
But everybody is distracted, regardless of age.
Students text during classes, parents text at dinner with their families or when they ’re with their children at the park.
Meanwhile children, too, text each other rather than talk to each other or, for that matter, look at the sky, allowing themselves to daydream.
We want to be with each other, but at the same time we want to be connected to other people and places with our phones.
The thing we now value most is control over where we put our attention.
What fundamentally new behaviors develop from this?
One example:
Even the presence of a phone changes the atmosphere.
It is alarming that new research shows that even the presence of a phone on the table changes what we talk about – even a phone that is turned off.
We keep the conversation light and we form less of an empathic connection with each other.
So it is not surprising that in the past 30 years we ’ve seen a 40 percent decline in the markers for empathy among college students.
The researchers link this drop to the new presence of digital communications.
How do devices manage to have such fundamental effects?
Our phones make us three promises.
Firstly, that we can put our attention wherever we want it to be.
Secondly, that we will never have to be alone.
And thirdly, that we will always be heard.
But as I said before, when we can put our attention anywhere, we take our attention off each other.
The ability to be alone is important in the development of the capacity both of self-reflection and of empathy.
We are so focused on being heard that we have more difficulty listening to others.
How do you teach children solitude?
By being “alone with” them.
Traditionally you would take a child for a quiet walk in nature.
And then the child learns to feel comfortable being alone in nature.
But now, when a parent walks with a child, a phone often comes along and children do n’t have the experience of being alone with a parent, let alone of being alone with a silent parent who is teaching a respect for quiet reflection.
I interview so many
No smartphones in the kitchen or dining room.
children who say that they have never, literally never, had the experience of taking a walk to a local store with a parent without a phone coming along that interrupted conversations along the way.
What are the rules in your home?
What rules did you have for your daughter?
The same rules I would ask everyone to follow.
No smartphone use in the kitchen or in the dining room.
In short, no smartphones during meals.
Or in the car.
These should be spaces that you reserve for conversation.
Are there other rules?
On average, children in the US are getting their first smartphones around age ten.
Children under thirteen should never go to their bedrooms at night with their phones.
There is a great temptation to text when you wake up in the middle of the night.
And then it is hard to go back to sleep.
Indeed, the greatest favor you can do your family is give everyone an old-fashioned alarm clock.
Should we stop using smartphones?
I ’m not suggesting that we run away from our devices.
I advocate that we have a more self-aware relationship with them.
I ’m optimistic because we are resilient.
After only a few days without screens, children begin to relearn the ability to identify the feelings of others, to have empathy.
So you have n’t gone from technology optimist to technology pessimist?
I am not anti-technology, I am proconversation.
Conversation is the most human and humanizing thing that we do.
So look up, look at each other, and start a conversation.
SHERRY TURKLE, 68, is a professor for Social Studies of Science and Technology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
She has published a number of best-sellers, including her latest book, Reclaiming Conversation:
The Power of Talk in a Digital Age.
Her research focuses on the psychology of people ’s relationship with technology, particularly computers.
# youthbarometer# 2016
Facebook, Twitter and online comments make politics more interesting and more grounded in the real world, according to 64 percent of young people in Singapore.
If they were given 10,000 dollars, US citizens would put 1,338 less in a savings account compared to last year.
The responses that have increased include “save for a house” and “invest in stocks/funds.”
75 percent of Brazilians are worried because of the corruption in their country.
Four years ago, the figure was only 50 percent.
Despite all the worries, young people look to the future with optimism.
59 percent of young Swiss people think that things will turn out well.
# youthbarometer www.credit-suisse.com/youthbarometer
INSPIRED
BY NATURE
The strong adhesive nature of the gecko ’s feet is known to have inspired superglue.
Borrowing this feature, coatings from Oerlikon are powerfully adhesive to metal surfaces, enabling tools to withstand extremely high friction, pressure, usage and heat.
blog.
oerlikon.
com www.oerlikon.com
CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
2/2016
A clear view...
075360 E
Gottardo
From Swiss Myth to the Longest Tunnel in the World
* As of December 2016, the journey south will be about half an hour shorter, and from 2020 as much as a full hour.
... of the Mediterranean*
Main partner
Our contribution to the future:
putting bold ideas solidly on track.
Deep beneath the Swiss Alps, the world ’s longest tunnel, stretching 57km, is nearing completion.
By the end of this year, the Gotthard base tunnel will be traversed daily by 260 freight and 65 passenger trains at speeds of up to 250 km/h, dramatically shortening journey times through the Alps.
To help make this engineering feat possible, ABB experts developed custom infrastructure, energy-efficient power distribution, and the largest fresh-air ventilation system ever built.
The Spirit of Enterprise – Then and Now
The Gotthard symbolizes world record-setting achievements.
When the first railway tunnel through the mountain opened in 1882, it was the longest tunnel in the world.
The new Gotthard Base Tunnel, scheduled to open on June 1 of this year, sets a new record at 57 kilometers.
The Gotthard also represents the visionary power of Switzerland – something that people occasionally call into question.
Switzerland, we often hear, is neither willing nor able to accomplish great things.
The Gotthard once proved otherwise – and it has done so again.
The first Gotthard railway tunnel, which largely owed its existence to the drive, courage and pioneering spirit of Alfred Escher, was “the expression of a dynamic, open and forward-looking Switzerland,” according to historian Joseph Jung (see page 21).
Escher also founded the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt – what is today Credit Suisse.
We are proud to be a main partner as the construction project of this century puts the Gotthard Base Tunnel into service.
Switzerland outdid itself with the first Gotthard project – and it is repeating the feat today.
Peter Jedelhauser, project manager for the Gotthard Base Tunnel, spoke with us about precisely this spirit of enterprise, a spirit that still thrives in our country.
“Together we said, ‘ Yes, we can do it!
’” (page 14).
In a major study, the Economic Research unit of Credit Suisse has identified the benefits the new railway line brings to Switzerland.
The Gotthard is a symbol of superlatives, of myths and visions.
But it also represents something else, something that may be less spectacular but is all the more important for that:
Swiss virtues such as perseverance, pragmatism, reliability and precision.
For example, when the Gotthard Base Tunnel broke through the last bit of rock, the drill was off its target by just 0.00014 percent.
What could be a better illustration of our country ’s strengths?
…
How will we ever explain that abroad?
I hope you ’ll enjoy reading about this amazing project!
Thomas Gottstein, CEO Swiss Universal Bank, Credit Suisse AG
Hauptpartner Partenaire principal Partner principale Main Partner
© AlpTransit Gotthard AG
The old lady ’s watch
Commissioned in 1952, the fleet comprising a total of 120 locomotives transported thousands of people and tonnes of goods through Switzerland.
While the train ’s official name was the «Ae 6/6», it was known to locomotive drivers as the «Gotthard locomotive» due to its typical area of use.
The old lady ’s days of travelling through the new Gotthard Base Tunnel are now over.
Instead, it will now travel all over the world as an exclusive special edition watch, the «Gottardo 2016».
Why does the special edition go by this name, you might ask?
Because its bezels come from the material used in the driver ’s cab doors of the «Gotthard locomotive».
Stainless steel case individually numbered.
Scratch-resistant sapphire crystal.
Precise Swiss quartz timepiece with original stop2go feature, as seen on clocks at Swiss railway stations.
Gift box with certificate and product information.
Two-year international warranty.
Available for CHF 750 from www.shop.mondaine.com Enjoy the rest of your trip.
Order form
Numbering assigned as orders are received.
Requests for specific numbers will not be accepted.
Gottardo2016
A 9500.30363.
G.
SET
Beige
750.–
A 9500.30363.
H.
SET
Brown
750.–
Quantity
First and last name:
:
Street/no.
:
PLZ/Ort:
E-mail:
Phone no.
:
Gottardo Nord Sud Quantity Signature:
A 669.30305 GOT.
SET
30 mm
260.–
A 627.30303 GOT.
SET
40 mm
260.–
(while stocks last) This order is binding.
Please complete the coupon in full and send it to:
Mondaine Watch Ltd. www.shop.mondaine.com Etzelstrasse 27 8808 Pfäffikon Switzerland
Contents
4 The Tunnel and Me
Nine people talk about how the Gotthard will change their lives.
12 Better, Faster, Longer
The construction project of the century in facts and figures.
14 “Two tracks, a lot of concrete”
SBB project manager Peter Jedelhauser mostly has a plan for almost everything.
20 The Swiss Wonder of the World
How modern Switzerland was created – thanks to Alfred Escher.
24 Who Should Pay for It?
Financial troubles for the first Gotthard Railway.
38 Stories from the Inside
Six contractors talk about the special challenges of building a tunnel.
43 The Saint and the Devil
How Gotthard got its name.
44 Heart of Swissness
From Dürrenmatt to Dobelli:
Gotthard in literature.
50 Gotthard Is Everywhere
A journey in photos to the Gotthards of this world.
52 Animals Underground
In the animal kingdom, tunnels provide protection from predators and the harsh environment.
26 INTRODUCTION Resetting the clocks on the Gotthard massif.
ECONOMIC RESEARCH
28 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION Switzerland grows closer.
30 ALTDORF DEVELOPMENT REGION:
Is history repeating itself?
31 REAL ESTATE MARKET Live in Bellinzona, work in Lugano.
32 GOODS TRAFFIC A “subway” for trade.
34 TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION Swiss discipline and its benefits.
35 BELLINZONA DEVELOPMENT AREA:
A new gateway to Ticino.
36 TOURISM A day in the sun, and how Ticino is coming closer.
37 LABOR MARKET New possibilities:
Flexible work and the NEAT.
56 Connection to the World
How do infrastructure construction and economic growth influence one another?
66 Last Stop!
Between German-speaking Switzerland and Ticino.
68 Letters to the Editor/Publishing Information
70 Quiz
Test your Gotthard knowledge:
seven questions about Switzerland ’s legendary mountain.
Take the quiz and win a trip through the tunnel!
The Tunnel and Me
Of course, NEAT will make getting around Switzerland faster.
But it also improves things in other ways:
some people are using the mountain drainage for farming fish, while others are skydiving more often.
Nine very different Gotthard users on the tunnel ’s new benefits and their plans for the future.
By Simon Brunner (text) and Patricia von Ah (photos)
WINEMAKER
Davide Ghidossi, 33, award-winning winemaker, Giubiasco (TI)
“My grandfather worked for the Swiss Federal Railways.
I remember riding with him from Bellinzona to Flüelen.
I was fascinated by the church in Wassen – you can see it three times as the train weaves its way upward through the valley.
The new line runs underneath Wassen.
It ’s very important, especially for small and medium-sized businesses in Ticino that need fast, on-time connections to their customers in German-speaking Switzerland.”
STUDENT
Nathalie Boissonnat, 30, studies public management and politics in Lugano and Bern, Giubiasco (TI)
“The Gotthard Tunnel was always part of my life.
I learned how to read traffic signs from the car when we drove through the tunnel.
I always wanted to know how much longer we ’d be driving, so my parents taught me what the kilometer markers meant.
I now live in Bern and travel home about every other week.
I ’m a big fan of public transportation, and I wish it would be a greater priority in Ticino.”
POLITICIAN
Fabio Regazzi, 53, Member of the National Council (CVP) and entrepreneur, Gordola (TI)
“I have to go through the Gotthard two to three times each month.
When I go to parliament, it makes more sense to travel by train since I can work during the trip.
The Gotthard Tunnel is a symbol of national solidarity, a connection between the different regions of Switzerland.
With the new tunnel, our country will grow closer together.
The same is true for Ticino – I ’ll be able to get from Gordola to Lugano in about 20 minutes.
Today it takes twice as long.”
ENTREPRENEUR
Richard L. Beeler, 64, Managing Director of Basis57, Adligenswil (LU)
“The new tunnel drains water from the mountains.
Basis57 wants to collect this water and use it for farming fish, such as zander and perch, as well as less common domestic species like burbot.
The fresh mountain water is around 15° C and will be used for producing 1,200 tons of fish per year.
Since the summer of 2015, the first fish have been living in a laboratory facility in Erstfeld, where we ’ve monitored their feeding and growth and perfected our technology.
The goal is to build a feeding facility at the tunnel ’s northern end by 2018, and to deliver gourmet fish from the Gotthard by 2020.”
SKYDIVER
Barbara Gloor, 52, business economist, Aristau (AG)
“Since I began skydiving in 2012, Ticino has become my second home.
I always look forward to the different light on the southern side of the Alps.
As soon as I drive out of the tunnel, my vacation begins, even if it ’s only for one day.
I need to have complete concentration for every single jump, which lets me disconnect completely and leave everyday worries behind.
Days at Para Centro in Locarno are so relaxing for me.
The view during the ascent, as well as in freefall and with my parachute open, has to be one of the most beautiful in the world.
I ’m thrilled that soon I ’ll be able to get there faster.”
FAN
Remo Kölliker, 39, social worker, Zurich
“I ’ve supported the Hockey Club Lugano since I was a kid – my parents are from Ticino.
Right now I make it to a handful of games each season.
Unfortunately, I have to drive because it ’s difficult to make the last train after the end of a game.
With shorter travel times, I hope that there will be more trains departing later.”
CONSTRUCTION WORKER
René Kempf, 47, heating and plumbing technician, Erstfeld (UR)
“I ’ve worked at the tunnel on and off since 2002; the construction site is practically our backyard.
NEAT was a part of my daily life for thirteen years.
I wo n’t have as much to do with the tunnel once it ’s finished – I do n’t take the train much.”
LOGISTICS SPECIALIST
Markus Müller, 50, logistics manager for Papyrus, a paper wholesaler, Turgi (AG)
“Today, rail cars are picked up at Dintikon (Aargau) at 9:30 p.
m.
and arrive in Ticino at 6:00 a.
m.
Earlier delivery would be advantageous for our distribution partners in Ticino, so they could send out their shipments earlier.
But reliability is even more important to us than saving time.
In the past, there were often interruptions in delivery.
Our customers rely on a fixed schedule.
If there ’s no paper at a printing plant, the machinery quickly comes to a stop and employees lose work.
We hope that the new Gotthard Tunnel will provide a more reliable connection to Ticino.”
VACATION HOME OWNER
Irene Durrer, 49, physician ’s assistant, Immensee (SZ)
“I travel to Ticino at least once a month – usually by car to our farmhouse in the Valle Maggia, and by train to visit relatives near Locarno.
I hope that the new railway tunnel will improve the situation for drivers by taking more trucks off the road.
Saving time isn’t so important to us.
We’d rather take the road over the pass to enjoy the scenery – as leisurely as possible.”
Better, Faster, Longer
The Gotthard Base Tunnel (GBT) is an epic achievement.
The tunnel in facts and figures.
Illustrations:
Anna Dunn, content:
Simon Brunner
PASSENGERS PER DAY –
Around 9,000 people per day currently travel through the Gotthard Tunnel with the Swiss Federal Railways (SBB).
The number of travelers is likely to more than double by 2025, thanks to faster and more frequent rail connections.
The SBB expects at least 15,000 travelers per day by 2020.
FREIGHT PER DAY –
Freight traffic benefits the most.
260 freight trains per day will pass through the base tunnel (up from 160 through the summit tunnel), and they can be heavier and longer.
Source:
sbb.
ch
TRAVEL TIME BASEL – LUGANO 1830 ROAD (GOODS) The first road over the pass opened in 1830.
1830 ROAD (STAGECOACH) The well-organized stagecoach line had many stations for changing horses, enabling relatively speedy travel with almost no interruption.
BEFORE 1830 MULE TRACK 1882 RAIL Opening of the Gotthard Tunnel
2015 RAIL lncreasingly powerful and faster engines shorten travel time.
2015 AUTO Today, cars and trains make the trip in about the same time.
2016 RAIL with GBT
2020 RAIL With the Ceneri Tunnel and renovation of the Axen tunnels.
14 DAYS 6 DAYS 49 hours 13:30 4:06 3:59 approx. 3:30 approx. 3:00 Source:
“Auf die Schienen, fertig, los!”
(Verkehrshaus Luzern/Christian Scheidegger), sbb.
ch, google.
ch/maps
HOW MUCH DID IT COST?
The Gotthard Base Tunnel cost 12.2 billion Swiss francs, including inflation, VAT and interest.
The entire NEAT – including the Lötschberg, Gotthard and Ceneri Base Tunnels – cost 23 billion Swiss francs.
EXCAVATED MATERIAL – 28.2 million tons of material were removed.
A large amount of the rock went back into the mountain as cement.
Leftover material was used for landscaping and filling dams, among other things.
Six islands were created in Lake Uri:
three as nature preserves and three for swimming.
Source:
Gottardo 2016 Source:
Gottardo 2016
THE WORLD ’S FIVE LONGEST TUNNELS
GOTTHARD BASE TUNNEL, 57.0 KM SWITZERLAND, 2016, COST:
CHF 12.2 BILLION
SEIKAN TUNNEL, 53.9 KM JAPAN, 1988, COST:
CHF 4.3 BILLION
EUROTUNNEL, 50.5 KM UNITED KINGDOM/FRANCE, 1994, COST:
CHF 16.1 BILLION
LÖTSCHBERG BASE TUNNEL, 34.6 KM SWITZERLAND, 2006, COST:
CHF 4.3 BILLION
GUADARRAMA TUNNEL, 28.4 KM SPAIN, 2007, COST:
CHF 1.34 BILLION
Source:
BLS, “Der Spiegel”, railway-technology.
com, “Today’s Railways Europe”
“TWO TRACKS, A LOT OF CONCRETE AND EVEN MORE TECHNOLOGY”
Mine drillers with “Heidi,” the tunnel drilling machine, after breaking through the last section of the Gotthard base tunnel near Sedrun on March 23, 2011.
The Gotthard base tunnel is more than a miracle of civil engineering.
With its record-breaking tunnel, the Swiss railway will be reinvented in December 2016.
All the connections come together in a single office in Lucerne.
That ’s where you ’ll find the SBB project manager, Peter Jedelhauser, who ’s thinking:
“Where could the next problem crop up?
How can I solve it?”
By Simon Brunner
Mr. Jedelhauser, you have already taken the trip that everyone in Switzerland impatiently awaits.
How does it feel to travel through the longest train tunnel in the world?
I ’m afraid I ’ll have to disappoint you.
The twenty minutes I spent during a test run did not feel much different than the fifteen minutes it takes today in the old Gotthard tunnel.
The biggest difference is the fact that the Italian spirit takes hold more quickly.
Today it takes 74 minutes to travel from Erstfeld to Biasca.
Starting in December 2016, it will be just a little more than 20 minutes.
And how does it feel?
The trip through the new tunnel takes five minutes longer than today, but you do n’t notice it.
However, the train is faster, at about 200 km/h.
Today we travel through the summit tunnel at 125 km/h.
Do you feel the speed?
On the contrary, it ’s remarkably smooth.
The track bed is fantastic, you feel like you ’re just gliding along.
When the railway opened in 1882, the first Gotthard tunnel was called the Swiss wonder of the world.
International commentators compared it to the construction of the ancient Egyptian pyramids.
Is the Gotthard base tunnel (GBT) a similar tour de force?
AlpTransit Gotthard AG (ATG) built the flat track through the Gotthard.
The longest tunnel in the world, 57 kilometers, with just 0.00014 percent deviation at the breakthrough.
Is it a wonder of the world?
I do n’t know.
But it is certainly an amazing accomplishment in which we take both pleasure and pride.
A wave of pride washed over the US with the first moon landing, and Russian self-confidence went up with the launch of the Sputnik missile.
Is the GBT a comparable moment for Switzerland?
The base tunnel is without doubt a construction project for the ages, and Swiss qualities have made a substantial contribution.
Pioneering spirit, the power of innovation, precision and the determination to see it through.
We came together and said, “Yes, we can do it.”
It was a democratic decision, supported by several referenda.
[See the history of the GBT, page 19, editor ’s note].
What was the greatest moment for you personally?
There were two.
For one, there was the breakthrough in the west tunnel with the enormous boring machine – that was huge.
And I will also never forget the first walk through the tunnel from Bodio to Erstfeld, long before track was laid.
It took more than eight hours – that ’s when I first became fully aware of the full scope of the project.
Apart from the time gained, what impact does this tunnel have?
The GBT is far more than two tracks, a lot of concrete and even more technology.
Ticino is now closer to Germanspeaking
ABOUT PETER JEDELHAUSER
Peter Jedelhauser, 57, is the director of project organization of the Gotthard north/south axis (PONS).
He worked for more than twenty years in the energy industry and built hydroelectric power plants and irrigation facilities around the world.
He studied engineering (railway technology) at ETH and has worked for eleven years at SBB.
PROJECT ORGANIZATION
The project organization of the north/south axis of Gotthard (PONS) is a SBB Group project and consists of nine sub-projects.
PONS is responsible for the start-up of the Gotthard and the Ceneri base tunnels, as well as the four-meter corridor.
Switzerland, the project has made a huge contribution to moving road traffic onto rail, and we have earned a positive image in the world.
Every taxpayer can say that he or she made a contribution to this achievement.
And what significance does the GBT have for the European transportation system?
The GBT also provides relief for highways in other countries, and that ’s why, for example, Germany is extending the Upper Rhine line.
For one thing, you save time from the North Sea port of Hamburg to Gallarate in Italy.
For another, there ’s greater capacity; we can use longer trains with higher clearance.
So this makes efficient, environmentally friendly solutions without traffic jams available to meet the logistical needs of our freight customers.
This also offers new options for internal Swiss freight traffic.
For example, for the first time we can connect Ticino to western Switzerland overnight.
You can ship a container from Ticino in the evening and it will arrive in Frenchspeaking Switzerland in the morning.
So the tunnel ’s biggest advantages are in transporting freight, not passengers?
To put it simply you could say that the new Gotthard railway is a freight railway with significant benefits for passenger traffic.
From an engineer ’s perspective, how does the GBT differ from other tunnels in Switzerland?
The GBT consists of many complex systems.
Controlling these systems is at least as challenging as building them.
Tunnel system, drainage system, ventilation systems, safety systems, controls, tunnel instrumentation – all of this must be handled by our personnel in a way that ensures safe, reliable and on-time rail operation at all times.
Does the new thinking apply to maintenance too?
Absolutely.
Imagine that you have to maintain the Zurich-Olten line, which is about the same length, but you only have access from two ends.
The standard SBB process simply does n’t work then.
And finally, planning the whole timetable was very demanding, especially in the context of the many construction sites.
But apart from all of that, the GBT is a completely normal tunnel (laughs).
One of the big issues is safety.
Safety was in fact one of our most important planning criteria.
So, for instance, we have two separate tunnels and two emergency stopping stations.
Can I be honest here?
I much prefer traveling through the new base tunnel than the old summit tunnel.
Why?
Let ’s assume the following case.
The train gets stuck.
That can happen.
Every 325 meters, one of the 178 connecting galleries leads to the other tunnel, where the passengers can take a different train.
Ideally after an incident, the train will halt at an emergency stop where passengers can use generous evacuation routes to escape to safety.
In the old summit tunnel, a transfer like that is nearly impossible.
That 1882 structure could have been expanded to some extent, but it could never have been brought up to the level of the base tunnel.
Can you say that the 57 kilometers through the new tunnel is the safest stretch in Switzerland?
I would endorse that statement without hesitation.
Speaking of safety, you use the term “sick train.”
What is that?
A train that is n’t allowed to enter the tunnel.
For example, a train whose brakes do n’t release.
A train on which the tarpaulin over a loaded car is loose.
A train that has a tank car that is leaking.
A train on which the antenna on a car flutters back and forth.
A locomotive whose current collector is not perfect.
A train that is asymmetrically loaded.
Or a train that is on fire.
And you diagnose all these “diseases” before the train enters the tunnel?
Yes.
Systems have been installed in the
Peter Jedelhauser on the Gotthard base tunnel (pictured):
“We organized the planning somewhat differently.”
northern and southern tunnel approaches that analyze the trains’rolling stock.
These train inspection devices discover the defects I described before they can cause greater damage in the tunnel.
“Sick trains” are stopped.
Every taxpayer can say that he or she made a contribution to this achievement.
It ’s just a few months before the tunnel opens.
Do you sometimes wake up in the middle of the night thinking, “Have I forgotten something important?
" We approached the planning somewhat differently than with other, comparable projects.
We proceeded from the risks.
What would happen if something goes wrong?
That led us to many valuable insights.
What if we ca n’t verify a certain type of rolling stock?
What do we do if we face difficulties with a construction permit?
What do I do then?
What is our fallback position?
But also:
When do I have to initiate it?
I can be relatively calm because we constantly posed these questions and prepared alternatives for every situation.
Clearly something can happen, but I think we are prepared.
You are the SBB project manager for the launch of the construction project of the century, and yet the whole project fits on one poster here in your small Lucerne office and looks like you ’re planning a somewhat larger Christmas party.
How is that possible?
Just to be clear, that is the overview, or you could call it our cockpit.
Altogether about 1,600 milestones were passed to get to what you see here.
How can so many milestones be processed without descending into chaos?
By defining work packets and areas that are clearly assigned; in our case there were nine.
We quite consciously began with our customers, not with the technology.
What do I have to do so that they are satisfied?
So they get what they pay for?
What do you think?
First, there has to be a good timetable for rail traffic along the entire north/south axis, for long-distance, regional and freight traffic.
In order to implement that timetable, however, I have to expand the feeder lines because the GBT ’s capacity will only matter if the feeder lines can deal with the increased traffic too.
Next I need electricity, so I have to build substations.
Then I need rolling stock, existing and new.
I need personnel for passenger and for freight traffic.
And finally, once it ’s opened, operation and maintenance must be ensured.
For all of that we must train our personnel, approximately 2,900 employees as well as 1,000 external ones.
Do you have all 1,600 milestones in your head?
No, maybe 30 percent.
Much more important than textbook planning is what you do with it.
One person is responsible for each work packet on that poster.
Anyone can miss a milestone and fail to meet a deadline as a result.
What is important then is to ask yourself
So we were ambitious but not reckless.
the question:
What impact does that have on my colleagues and their work?
And how can we master and reduce that possible impact?
This integrated perspective is a central component of success in my opinion.
However, it ’s not easy for someone to admit that something is wrong.
That is a question of the culture!
To me, two basic values are especially important in this context.
Transparency, even if it hurts.
But in my experience, it hurts more if a defect surfaces later.
And reliability.
In the end, both worked very well.
Here I have to give a huge thank you to my staff.
Did anything ever go wrong?
Oh sure!
We had repeated difficulties, for example, with construction permits, with technological developments, or with the delivery of rolling stock.
Precarious situations, but we were never completely helpless because we had already thought of alternatives.
We could usually fall back on a plan B in such difficult situations.
All around the world, these large infrastructure projects are notorious for delays, or they are n’t finished at all.
The GBT, however, will go into operation a year ahead of time.
How was that possible?
ATG, which built the tunnel, realized in 2010 during a consultation and reassessment of the construction and assembly programs for the GBT that there was a possibility of putting the tunnel into operation a year earlier than planned.
While that was fundamentally very good news, it was also a major challenge for SBB.
It meant we had only five instead of six years to complete all our work.
In fact, that wiped out any time we had to spare.
Did this make you angry?
Initially I saw a lot of risks and problems.
But then one day a colleague from ATG said to me, “This is your big chance to go full speed ahead.”
He was right.
If time is short, you end up spending a lot less time on unnecessary details at the wrong time.
You look for simple, pragmatic solutions and implement them together,
Control room for the Gotthard base tunnel in Pollegio.
HISTORY OF THE GBT
Half an eternity lies between the first sketch and the celebration of the opening of the Gotthard base tunnel.
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 1947 Engineer Carl Eduard Gruner outlines the visionary idea for a Gotthard base tunnel.
1963 The federation evaluates different railway tunnel options.
1971 SBB is tasked with planning the Erstfeld-Biasca Gotthard base line.
1992 The people of Switzerland approve the New Transalpine Railway (NEAT) and the construction of new base tunnels at Lötschberg, Gotthard and Ceneri.
1993 Initial drilling probes in the Piora basin indicate the most geo-technically favorable path for the line.
1994 The “alpine initiative” is accepted by popular vote and protection of the Alps is included in the Federal Constitution.
1995 The Federal Council approves the line layout between Erstfeld and Bodio and the Bodio-Giustizia open line.
1999 The tunnel is broached at the GBT in November.
2010 The main breakthrough between Sedrun and Faido is made at the Gotthard base tunnel.
2016 The GBT will be opened on June 1, and it goes into operation in December.
2020 The north/south axis will be fully operational after the opening of the Ceneri base tunnel and the four-meter corridor.
with a clear focus.
So that ’s how you become very efficient too.
You can also set goals that are just too high.
And with the GBT, we are talking about a project worth 12 billion Swiss francs.
Clearly, courage is one thing, foolishness is something else.
In 2011 we made a decision.
Together we would bet every- thing on starting regular operations in December 2016.
We also set a point of return where, two years prior to that, we would once again review the books together and definitely decide, based on developments and risks, whether it would really be December 2016.
So we were ambitious but not reckless.
Still, there ’s hardly any place in the world where such giant projects are put in operation a full year ahead of time.
Why in Switzerland?
Three reasons:
We never had to deal with questions of political legitimacy.
The project was supported by the population; everyone knew that it was a decision democratically arrived at by the majority.
Everywhere we encountered a positive attitude.
Objections could have made life much more difficult for us.
There is much less support when private business or governments decide on such a project without broad public support.
In addition it is a railway project, and the Swiss have an especially great affinity for that.
Secondly?
Second, we had a licensing and authorization agency, the Swiss Federal Office of Transport, that worked very expeditiously.
Not one construction permit or authorization took more time than we had planned for it.
And third, both ATG and we at SBB put together teams that were authorized to make decisions at any time and co-operated constructively.
Did you also learn lessons for your personal life through this project?
Your personal life is perhaps one of the few places where “What if?”
and options are not always needed.
But I was able to pass along something to my children by asking them, “What do you do if your plan does not work out?”
You are in charge of one of the largest projects in Switzerland.
In your spare time, are you someone who plans ahead or are you more unstructured?
There ’s something else besides those two options.
I am spontaneous.
If my daughter, who works at SWISS, asks, “Want to go with me to New York tomorrow?”
and I can arrange it, then I ’ll go with her.
Did you often sleep poorly because of the project?
Yes, often at the beginning.
Because it was difficult to set boundaries?
I try to avoid that expression.
Thinking in intersecting sets is more efficient than thinking in separate units.
When boundaries are too fixed, there is an enormously high probability that something will fall between the cracks.
How did you prevent such a gigantic task from consuming you?
It is an illusion to think that you can come home, flip the switch, and be somewhere else in your thoughts.
When you ’re given a task like this, it is crucial that you have a real zeal for it, a kind of sacred fire.
Personal enthusiasm.
And I am unusually lucky because my family is interested in what I do.
Switching off though, that ’s something I had to learn.
I think I do that better today than in the past.
Alfred Escher (1819 – 1882):
The Gotthard visionary never once traveled through the tunnel that was built thanks to him.
The Swiss Miracle
How Switzerland, once isolated from the rest of the world, became a modern state:
The history of the Gotthard Railway, in which a certain Alfred Escher played the role of his life.
By Joseph Jung
No construction project has affected Switzerland as profoundly as the Gotthard Railway, which opened on June 1, 1882.
It is the manifestation of a dynamic, open-minded and innovative Switzerland – the culmination of its audacity, courage, pioneering spirit and visionary thinking.
The rail route finally connected the canton of Ticino with northern Switzerland, which helped bring its economy to life.
As a vital lifeline for the Swiss export industry, the Gotthard Railway was primarily intended for international transport.
Initially, it added a new dimension to the economic and cultural relationships between Italy, Germany and Switzerland.
But its significance is even wider reaching.
The Country Needs Infrastructure The tunnel through the Alps turned the Gotthard Railway into an international link between northern Europe, the Suez Canal and the East, with Switzerland
1882 GOTTHARD RAILWAY
The Gotthard Railway opened on June 1, 1882.
As a vital lifeline for the Swiss export industry, it was primarily intended for international transport and opened up economic and cultural relationships between Italy, Germany and Switzerland.
as its linchpin.
Little wonder, then, that Switzerland held an opening ceremony with pomp and circumstance, treating the world to a spectacular show.
If we look back to three decades before the Gotthard Railway opened, we find a vastly different Switzerland.
It was a country isolated in so many ways from industrialized nations.
Until the middle of the 19th century, Switzerland lacked the infrastructure of a modern country.
Zurich-born Alfred Escher realized the seriousness of these deficits in the first half of the 19th century.
He pointed out the urgency of the situation in one of his first speeches to the National Council.
The railway lines, he said, were approaching Switzerland from all sides while it stood idly by.
The country was at risk of being completely circumvented, leaving it as nothing more than a forgotten backwater.
In fact, Switzerland had only one railway – the 23-kilometer Swiss Northern Railway from Zurich to Baden.
Escher ’s speech was the start of a breathtaking performance – “The Dawn of Modern Switzerland” – in which he played the role of his life as a visionary, pioneer, politician and economic leader.
Among the many complex challenges associated with the railway policy after the federal state was founded in 1848, the members of the Swiss parliament had
Booming Railways Luckily, this frightening scenario was avoided.
The facts speak for themselves.
The decision of the summer of 1852 gave free rein to Swiss railway construction.
Switzerland experienced a railway boom unlike any other in Europe.
Railway companies were sprouting up everywhere.
Less than ten years later, Mittelland was connected; the tracks were in place from Lake Constance to Lake Geneva.
Alfred Escher himself – cantonal councilor, member of the Grand Council and National Council and much more – also handled operational management of the Swiss Northeastern Railway (1853), one of the largest railway companies.
He had a new main station built in Zurich (1865/ 71) and made the “City on the Limmat” a transportation hub.
Even in retrospect, the incredible pace at which railways were built in Switto answer the all-important question of whether railways should be built and operated by the government or by private companies.
At the same time, the route had to be defined and construction priorities set.
Escher was well aware of the risks and opportunities behind the political decisions being made in Bern for the canton of Zurich.
He worried that eastern Switzerland would be largely ignored if the railway project was handled by the federal government.
The Government ’s Role At the heart of the political discussion about the railway was the question of how to pay for it.
This became all the more important as the discussion centered not only on the railway project but also on the construction of the Swiss university.
For this reason, the Swiss parliament first needed to decide what the state ’s role was versus what fell more logically within the scope of the private sector.
The members of parliament balked at the idea of having to finance two major projects – the railway and the university – at the same time.
Against this backdrop, Escher succeeded in separating the two issues.
Contrary to the wishes of the National Council committee, he convinced the majority of the Federal Assembly to approve a law that left the construction and operation of the railways to the private sector.
As a result, the Railway Act essentially excluded the federal government and accorded it no legal means to intervene.
It did not even have supervisory authority over the railway companies and could only decide on routes for reasons of military policy.
However, discussions like these are missing the point.
At the time – in the middle of the 19th century – the only issue was how to build the railway as fast as possible to secure Switzerland ’s existence.
Imagine how the railways would have been built on the government ’s watch.
Federal funding was simply not sufficient to provide proper support to other infrastructure projects alongside establishing the Swiss army.
What little money could have gone to the railways would have meant a decades-long project to develop the Mittelland region.
The other viewpoint is just as disheartening:
We do n’t need a crystal ball to imagine how much the members of parliament in Bern would have argued about the routes to be built.
zerland in the 1850s/60s and the terrific momentum at which railway construction speeded up industrialization and vitalized the national economy prove that Escher took the right approach.
This is true even in light of the financial ups and downs that the railway companies later experienced, the numerous takeover battles and the fact
1854 ETH ZURICH
Because Switzerland had no schools for the engineers or technicians, mathematicians or geologists that were in demand due to the railway boom, the Swiss Federal Polytechnic was founded in 1854.
It is now known as the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich.
Alfred Escher remained part of the institute ’s management committee until his death.
that most companies were later acquired by foreign holdings and then nationalized at the start of the 20th century.
Thanks to private companies, Switzerland soon caught up with neighboring countries in the second half of the 19th century.
Literally from one year to the next, private rail transport was able to provide the transport capacity needed for the domestic market.
panies incorporate and funded public infrastructure such as streets.
Through the bank, Escher turned Zurich into the financial center of Switzerland.
Heading South In the 1860s, Switzerland almost missed out on another stage in Europe ’s development, as it still had no north-south line through the Alps.
France and Austria were already building Alpine railways.
Various versions of a transalpine link had been discussed but never finalized.
There were projects from Lukmanier via Splügen to the Simplon pass.
Faced with this situation, Alfred Escher backed the Gotthard project and became chairman of the Gotthard Railway Company in 1871.
To make this monumental plan a reality, Escher threw all his economic and political weight behind it.
He took care of the budget and financ-
1856 KREDITANSTALT ZÜRICH
In 1856, Escher founded the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt – today ’s Credit Suisse – in order to finance the railroad companies.
The Schweizerische Lebensversicherungs- und Rentenanstalt (Swiss Life) followed in 1857.
A Business and Financial Center The 1852 decision turned out to be a lucky one not only in terms of railway policy, as Switzerland was in danger of losing its foothold in other areas during the middle of the 19th century.
The railway boom needed trained professionals who could meet the demands of railway companies.
Routes had to be built under the best topographic conditions.
Train stations had to be built, bridges constructed and tunnels planned.
However, Switzerland had no schools for engineers or technicians, mathematicians or geologists.
Thus, in 1854, what is now known as the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich was founded.
Here, too, Escher made his mark.
Escher remained part of the institute ’s management committee until his death.
The school promoted knowledge transfer from theory to practice.
The professors, most of whom were from foreign countries, were pioneers in the area of scientific research.
Simply put, the institute set the foundation for Switzerland as a center of research.
However, a lack of funds also posed major financial challenges to the railways.
Because Switzerland had no commercial banks at the time, they had to obtain capital elsewhere.
However, foreign lenders and investors wanted a say in the development of the Swiss railway companies, even when it came to route planning.
Escher, for his part, did not welcome this influence.
He decided Switzerland needed its own financial infrastructure, and in 1856 he founded Schweizerische Kreditanstalt, now known as Credit Suisse.
One year later he founded Schweizerische Lebensversicherungs- und Rentenanstalt, now known as Swiss Life.
By founding the bank, Escher first covered the financial needs of his Northeastern Railway.
The bank also became the engine of the Swiss economy.
It provided venture capital to private companies, helped coming, negotiated with Swiss, German and Italian decision-makers, and sought the best people for the project.
This included Geneva-born Louis Favre, whose company won the contract to build the 15 km tunnel.
Back then, the Gotthard Railway was euphorically declared the Swiss wonder of the world that would take travelers in the Belle Epoque along “the world ’s most picturesque route” through the Gotthard.
Even in the 21s t century, the ingenious design, generous planning and technical performance and characteristics behind the Gotthard Railway ’s design and construction are still amazing.
The world ’s largest construction site was created between Airolo and Göschenen.
Thousands of workers flocked from abroad, mainly Italy.
While the Gotthard Railway is without a doubt a true masterpiece even today, some of the private housing or Favre company barracks where the workers lived were notorious for their terrible hygiene conditions.
The working conditions in the tunnel itself were also extremely tough.
Many tunnel workers were ill and fell victim to epidemics.
More than 300 people died during the construction work, not including the guest workers who died as a result of illness or injury after returning home.
A Hero ’s Tragic Fall Of all things, it was the historic Gotthard project that became Escher ’s biggest personal defeat and the greatest disappointment of his life.
In 1878 he had to leave the construction project due to ultimately minor budget overruns.
It was the end of his era.
Switzerland had changed and direct democracy (1874) brought a new identity.
“We are a dying breed,” Escher told a friend.
The pioneers of the founding generation were old, many of them already dead.
Escher was becoming a relic of a bygone era.
He became “persona non grata” with the Gotthard Railway and in 1880 no one even mentioned his name during the breaking through ceremony.
Two years
Who Should Pay for It?
later, he was initially left off the guest list for the opening of the Gotthard Railway in Lucerne – a list that included some 360 Italian and 100 German members of nobility and dignitaries, plus 400 Swiss guests.
At the last minute, the Swiss president did invite him, but Escher was already very ill and could not make the trip to Lucerne.
Thus he never noticed that neither the president nor any other speakers mentioned his name.
He never traveled through the tunnel either.
While Alfred Escher never received thanks from his native country, today his initiatives and predictions, not to mention his commitment to the good of Switzerland, are seen in a much different light.
After all, he made by far the biggest contribution to the birth of modern Switzerland.
Joseph Jung is a historian, publicist and managing director of the Alfred Escher Foundation.
He has published extensive works on Switzerland ’s economic and cultural history from the 19th century to the present.
His biography of Alfred Escher is a bestseller:
“Switzerland ’s success story|The life and work of Alfred Escher (1819 – 1882)” www.briefedition.alfred-escher.ch www.alfred-escher.ch
Public funds scarcely played a role in the construction project in 1882.
The new base tunnel, on the other hand, is being financed solely through taxes and duties.
At the international Gotthard conference in Bern in 1869, a cost of 187 million Swiss francs was estimated for the construction of the Gotthard route (about 1.5 billion Swiss francs today).
Around one third was allotted for the tunnel between Göschenen and Airolo, and two thirds for the remaining sections from Immensee to Chiasso.
Of this total cost, 102 million would be obtained from the international financial market, while 85 million would be guaranteed as subsidies by Germany (20 million), Italy (45 million) and Switzerland (20 million).
The 15 cantons and three cities that had joined the Swiss Confederation contributed to those payments.
Only 13 million Swiss francs were collected in this way.
It took the private Swiss Northeastern Railway and Swiss Central Railway companies, which took on one third of the funding guaranteed by Switzerland – 7 million Swiss francs – as well as an additional 9 million in investment capital that the two companies had already made available.
The percentage of public funds provided by Switzerland came to a mere 7 percent, which is to say that the federal government did not pay one centime during this phase.
By contrast, the companies managed by Alfred Escher – the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt and the Swiss Northeastern Railway – assumed more than 11 percent of the costs.
Too Costly The Gotthard Railway Company fell into a financial crisis in 1875.
The 1869 cost estimates for construction were too low.
The reasons were diverse:
higher costs due to incorrect technical calculations, higher wage and material costs, flooding in the tunnel and approach routes, and a complete lack of experience in dealing with Gotthard granite.
The rift between the Board of Governors and the chief engineer also became public in the form of bitter feuds:
disparaging slurs and invectives, which Escher felt subjected to.
The cost issue ultimately forced him to step down as chairman of the Gotthard Railway Company (1878).
However, before he signed his letter of resignation, he felt obligated to mitigate the complex problem of additional costs and carry out a restructuring effort.
He succeeded in reducing the additional costs to 40 million Swiss francs.
Of that amount, Escher was able to acquire 12 million francs in tough negotiations on the international financial markets.
Germany and Italy took on another 10 million each.
Switzerland committed itself to a total of 8 million Swiss francs (Treaty of 1878), which would be divided up in turn among the individual cantons and the two major private rail companies – an unrealistic expectation overall.
In this situation, the Federal Council proposed a subsidy of 6.5 million francs to Parliament.
After emotional debates that were humiliating for Escher, a subsidy amounting to 4.5 million Swiss francs was approved.
So the Confederation ultimately did participate in Switzerland ’s international rail route that opened in 1882, even if it only covered around 2 percent of the costs.
The New Transalpine Railway (NEAT), on the other hand, is being funded entirely by the public sector, i.
e.
, with taxes and duties.
According to official data, the cost of NEAT, including the Lötschberg, Gotthard and Ceneri Base Tunnels, will amount to around 23 billion Swiss francs.
The money comes from the FinöV fund for largescale railway projects, financed by a heavy goods vehicle tax (60 percent), petroleum tax (10 percent) and value added tax (30 percent).
Author:
Joseph Jung
Residence&amp;Apartments
How about an apartment where the breathtaking view is only the first thing on a long list of special features?
The new apartments on the Europaallee in Zurich boast more than just fantastic views – they also come complete with all the extras which make living in serviced accommodation so enjoyable.
Without even mentioning the restaurant, café and bar in the complex!
Interested?
Residence|Apartments|Restaurant|Bar|Café Gustav-Gull-Platz 5|8004 Zurich|T:
+41 (0) 44 250 65 00|info@gustav-zuerich.ch |gustav-zuerich.
ch
ECONOMIC RESEARCH
RESETTING THE CLOCKS ON THE GOTTHARD MASSIF
The railway shapes Switzerland.
Like arteries, it connects the country ’s regions, transports people and goods, and supplies the population and the economy.
After the road-building euphoria of the 1960s, it now reigns as the key factor for commerce, spatial development and tourism.
The formative influence of the railway network was made clear in the growth of the railway town Olten.
New streetcar and tram lines triggered a construction boom in its communities that is still in evidence today.
BASEL, ZURICH, LUCERNE
MINUS 42 MIN 1
BELLINZONA
Will the NEAT change Switzerland?
Definitely!
In a comprehensive study, Credit Suisse Economic Research investigated its economic impact – who will be the winners, and whether there will also be losers.
The central topics are the movement of goods, increased accessibility, day-trip tourism, real estate markets and the gateway train stations in Altdorf and Bellinzona.
In addition to the “clear view of the Mediterranean,”
ECONOMIC RESEARCH
CONTENTS the NEAT could speed the connection to the product markets of Asia and make labor markets more flexible.
Alpine transit was reinvented in 1882, when the Gotthard Railway was built.
Although the visionaries of that time focused on the economic benefits of the tunnel, they could hardly foresee all the effects of the construction project.
Likewise, the NEAT could facilitate things that are not even remotely apparent today.
The Credit Suisse Economic Research project team:
Thomas Rühl (head), Simon Hurst, Sara Carnazzi Weber, Jan Schüpbach, Tim Maurer
52 minutes faster from Zurich to Lugano
AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION → P.
28
120,000 m 2 commercial and industrial area at the new Altdorf cantonal railway station
DEVELOPMENT REGION → P.
30
A condominium in Lugano today costs
41% more than a comparable one in Bellinzona.
The NEAT will merge the various housing markets
HOUSING MARKET → P.
31
40 million tons:
Annual cargo capacity will double
MOVEMENT OF GOODS → P.
32
70,000 Swiss francs:
cost to build one meter of the Base Tunnel
TUNNEL VIEW → P.
34
3,150 m 2 of office and commercial space under construction at the NEAT station in Bellinzona
DEVELOPMENT REGION → P.
35
260,000 more people can reach the Locarno catchment area as day tourists
TOURISM → P.
36
42% of the workforce could work independent of location
LABOR MARKET → P.
37
BELLINZONA LUGANO LUGANO LOCARNO
MINUS 10 MIN 1 MINUS 29 MIN 1
As of 2020, according to information available today
ECONOMIC RESEARCH PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
SWITZERLAND GROWS CLOSER
Long distances and extended travel time act as grit in the gears of the economy.
They slow the flow of goods, commuter travel and cooperation between regions.
Easily accessible locations enjoy better opportunities for growth.
British geologist Charles Greville was the first to cross the Gotthard Pass by coach in 1775.
To accomplish this feat, he needed 78 assistants who dismantled the coach and carried it by hand across obstacles.
In contrast, the access road opened in 1830 represented great progress.
Until the first Alpine tunnel opened at the end of the 19th century, routes into southern Switzerland still remained arduous; accordingly, there was little commercial trade.
Much faster connections on rail and road have turned crossing the Alps from a trying journey into a walk in the park.
Unlike Goethe, who
Bellinzona benefits the most from NEAT
More attractive thanks to greater accessibility:
Lugano city center.
only managed to make the trip three times in his life – a person might now make the journey annually, weekly or even daily.
The NEAT will boost the accessibility of the Ticino and Uri regions.
Their catchment areas will increase in size; they will grow closer to the major metropolitan areas.
In order to quantify this impact, Credit Suisse Research modeled the entire public transportation plan on the opening of the Gotthard and Ceneri Base Tunnels.
The catchment areas of all Swiss towns were calculated on the basis of all 450 million connections between every populated square kilometer and journey time preferences.
The effect of foreign metropolitan areas was also included.
1 Accessibility is defined as the sum of all accessible persons weighted according to the likelihood that they would under-
ECONOMIC RESEARCH
Public transport accessibility of the Swiss population
Synthetic indicator, km 2, changes from 2016 timetable and the 2020 modeled timetable
Schaffhausen Accessibility Basel high low
Delémont
Aarau
Frauenfeld
St. Gallen
Solothurn Zug Zurich Neuchâtel Bern Lucerne Glarus
+ 15% Altdorf
+ 13,200 people
Chur
Lausanne
Fribourg
Gotthard Base Tunnel
Geneva
Sion
+ 24% Locarno
+ 21,000 people Chiasso
+ 23% Bellinzona
+ 33,000 people Ceneri Base Tunnel
+ 8.5% Lugano
+ 23,300 people
Source:
search.
ch, Geostat, Credit Suisse take such a trip.
Transport connections play a key role when companies choose their location and people their place of residence.
Easily accessible regions are more attractive and therefore have more favorable economic prospects.
More Traffic – More Development Metropolitan areas demonstrate the highest accessibility or centrality; peripheral and mountainous areas, of course, achieve lower values.
In contrast to individual transportation, accessibility by means of public transportation is highest in the proximity of long-distance train stations.
The Greater Zurich area ranks highest in terms of accessibility, followed by Basel and Bern.
In addition to transport connections, an area ’s population density is key, which explains Altdorf ’s relatively low score.
The new cantonal train station with a direct connection to Zurich increases Altdorf ’s commuter catchment area by 13,200 persons or by 15 percent.
Bellinzona benefits the most from NEAT:
The size of its catchment area increases by 33,000 persons.
Faster connections to the Lugano area make Bellinzona more attractive for commuters and are likely to intensify exchange between the two sections of the canton.
Companies have a larger area for recruiting staff, and those looking for work have more choices.
In percentage terms, Locarno shows the greatest improvement.
The much faster connection to Lugano – without the hairpin turn in Giubiasco – expands the catchment area by 24 percent or 21,000 persons.
AUTHORS:
THOMAS RÜHL AND JAN SCHÜPBACH
1 Further information:
Locational quality of the Swiss cantons and regions.
Credit Suisse 2013.
ECONOMIC RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT REGION:
ALTDORF
IS HISTORY REPEATING ITSELF?
The Altdorf railway station will connect Uri to the NEAT.
What the new link will bring to the canton – and what it wo n’t.
Preliminary sketch of the Altdorf railway station, expected to open in 2021.
The builders of the first Gotthard line in 1882 did not want to detour through Altdorf.
They drew the tracks through the Uri valley in a straight line from Flüelen to Erstfeld.
They placed the train station in the middle of the Reuss plain, far from the village center, despite protests from the canton ’s residents.
But the railway brought commercial and industrial activity, which meant a surge in growth for Altdorf.
About 140 years later, it seems that history will repeat itself.
Starting in 2021, the Intercity Basel – Lugano train, which passes through the Gotthard Base Tunnel, will stop in Altdorf every two hours.
There will also be an hourly InterRegio train, and for commuters, morning and evening, the “Innerschweizer Sprinter,” a direct connection to Zug and Zurich.
This time around, Altdorf is ready for the Gotthard railway.
A new cantonal train station will be a central hub on the valley floor, where four-fifths of the canton ’s residents live.
The bus service is being reorganized, expanded and scheduled to work with the new connections.
In addition, the canton is building a complex with 120,000 square meters of commercial and industrial space adjacent to the railway line.
The area between the Reuss River, the freeway and the tracks, once difficult to access and hardly used, will become a highly developed center of growth in Uri.
According to official calculations, this could bring 1,300 to 1,400 new jobs and 170 to 260 new residents to the vicinity around the train station.
The cost for the public authorities and the Swiss Federal Railways (SBB):
approximately 80 million Swiss francs, not including construction of the new train station itself.
Uri Seizes Its Opportunity On the whole, Uri ranks below average in terms of locational quality.
Much of the canton is mountainous terrain, with only 2 percent suitable for development.
Of that, more than 40 percent is occupied by transport infrastructure – roads, highways and railways.
Many of these are national routes.
As a result, options for making the canton more attractive are very limited.
All the more important, then, are comprehensive land use planning and improved accessibility within the canton, as Uri is now striving to achieve.
Indeed, in its bid to draw companies, jobs and tax revenues to Altdorf, Uri is dedicating its last large, contiguous land reserve to the new commercial quarter.
The hoped-for 1,300 additional jobs would equal one-tenth of the canton ’s current employment total.
Although the Uri Valley development project is a decades-long undertaking, the expectations are ambitious – the number of job-holders in the canton is on the decline.
However, it might be possible to reverse this trend.
The anticipated addition of 170 to 260 new residents in Altdorf seems realistic.
The InterCity train stop also makes Altdorf more attractive to commuters.
Nevertheless, the “Gotthard boom” will probably not be repeated in the same order of magnitude.
In 1882, the railway offered an efficient alternative to mule paths and gravel roads.
Today, a heavily traveled road and rail transit axis already passes through the canton.
Nevertheless, the new traffic plan and better connections are already drawing the Uri Valley closer to the economic hubs in the central plateau of the Mittelland.
Furthermore, as a member of the Greater Zurich Area marketing association since 2016, the canton already belongs in spirit to that economic region.
AUTHOR:
SIMON HURST
ECONOMIC RESEARCH REAL ESTATE MARKET
LIVE IN BELLINZONA, WORK IN LUGANO
The Ceneri Base Tunnel is bringing Ticino real estate markets closer together for renters and homeowners.
In the canton of Ticino, housing prices have followed the Swiss trend, rising 76 percent on average since 2000.
The Lugano region has led the way, with prices shooting upward by 96 percent.
Prices in the Bellinzona region and Tre Valli have increased by 68 and 32 percent, respectively.
Since accessibility to transportation is among the factors that strongly influence real estate demand, there is considerable interest in NEAT ’s effect on the Ticino housing market.
Source:
“Wüest&amp;Partner”
Bellinzona Gains Appeal The time savings promised by the Gotthard Base Tunnel, combined with new technologies and more flexible work schedules, could bolster Ticino ’s appeal as a location for primary residences (see page 37).
The impact on housing prices, however, is likely to be marginal.
It ’s the Ceneri Base Tunnel – NEAT ’s southern segment – that will be decisive for Ticino ’s primary housing market.
With a new commute time of only twelve minutes, living in Bellinzona and working in Lugano will become more appealing, given significantly lower housing costs in the canton ’s capital.
Renters in Lugano today pay on average 17 percent more per square meter than in Bellinzona; for homeowners, the price difference is a hefty 41 percent.
The opening of the Ceneri Base Tunnel in 2020 could reduce this disparity.
Renters and homeowners who move to the outskirts of Lugano to escape high housing prices may, in the future, increasingly opt to live in Bellinzona.
In the
Living in Lugano is more expensive than in Bellinzona:
+ 41% home prices
+ 17% rents
Bellinzona:
Demand for homes should increase.
wake of NEAT, Bellinzona ’s residential significance will increase.
The Gotthard Base Tunnel is unlikely to bring fundamental changes to the secondary housing market.
There is limited potential for increased demand; according to the Swiss Federal Statistical Office, public transportation is used for only 19 percent of vacation and getaway travel.
In particular, second homes in the mountains and valleys are usually difficult to reach by train or bus.
Public transportation is likely to be used infrequently for travel to vacation homes.
In the long term, however, self-driving cars could make travel from central train stations to places of residence more efficient.
Then public transportation would become more attractive for owners of second homes.
Beyond the limited potential for demand, new construction is also restricted by the second home initiative.
Since the most attractive Ticino communities already have a high percentage of secondary residences, new construction is no longer allowed.
The exceptions are Lugano and Bellinzona, where the critical quota for secondary residences has not yet been reached.
Better accessibility is likely to increase demand slightly.
AUTHOR:
TIM MAURER
ECONOMIC RESEARCH GOODS TRAFFIC
A “SUBWAY” FOR TRADE
The NEAT was designed as a corridor for transporting goods.
Now, almost 30 years after planning began, it is clear that this new route will indeed shift some traffic from the roads to the rails – but not as much as originally predicted.
The volume of freight transported through the Alps by road and rail doubled between 1980 and 2014, from 50 to 100 million tons.
Today 40 percent of this freight goes through the Swiss Alps, the other 60 percent through Austria or France.
The railways are in a stronger position in Switzerland than in neighboring countries because of the Swiss policy, anchored in law, of seeking to shift traffic from the roads to the railways.
Nearly 70 percent of the freight that goes through the Alps in Switzerland is transported by rail (Austria:
30 percent, France:
15 percent).
Trade between Germany and Italy accounts for most of this traffic (40 percent); transports between the Benelux countries and Italy make up another 30 percent.
Ranking third in importance is trade between the German- and Italian-speaking regions of Switzerland.
Freight traffic is continuing to shift from the roads to the railways.
In the year 2000, there were still some 1.4 million trucks on Switzerland ’s Alpine roads; since then the number has dropped to 1 million – a decrease of 28 percent.
That is an impressive accomplishment, particularly since the total volume of freight transported through the Swiss Alps has increased by 32 percent over the same period.
It should be noted, however, that one reason for the decline in the number of truck trips is that trucks weighing up to 40 tons have been allowed to use the roads since 2001 (the previous limit was 28 tons), and another is the introduction of a capacity-linked levy on heavy vehicles (LSVA).
Despite substantial progress, it will not be possible to reach the ambitious goal set for 2018 – as the Federal Council has conceded.
That goal, set by law, was to eliminate 650,000 truck trips per year.
How Will NEAT Help?
This big question is this:
What difference will NEAT make in shifting traffic from road to rail?
A flat railway through the Alps will become a reality in 2020.
With the Gotthard and Ceneri base tunnels, trains traveling from Rotterdam and Genoa will no longer have to contend with steep climbs.
Which has priority, freight or passenger trains?
At its highest point, the tunnel will be 550 meters above sea level, the altitude of the city of Bern.
The benefits for freight traffic are obvious:
more freight per train, fewer locomotives and personnel, shorter travel times and reduced energy consumption.
However, certain issues remain.
NEAT will not fulfill its full potential until the entire route from Basel to the container terminals in northern Italy is capable of accommodating longer and taller trains.
This requires expanding tunnel height to four meters.
According to official projections, thanks to NEAT the number of freight transports crossing the Alps by truck will be reduced by 240,000 by
ECONOMIC RESEARCH
Transalpine freight traffic through Switzerland
Most important routes (volume)
Flows of freight in millions of tons (2014), by route (road and rail)
Northern Switzerland – Italy 5 France – Italy 2 UK – Italy 1 Scandinavia – Italy 0.5 Other routes 5 Benelux*– Italy 11
* A large percentage of trade with the Far East goes through the ports of Rotterdam, Hamburg and Antwerp.
Germany*– Italy 15
Road vs. rail (volume)
In millions of tons
Road (trips)
In thousands of trucks
1,600 1,200 All Alpine crossings Gotthard 800 400 0 2015 Target:
eliminate 650,000 trucks from the roads by 2018 1981 1991 2001 2015
Remaining Obstacles The benefits of NEAT are limited by the capacity of Italian feeder routes.
Accordingly, the Swiss government has agreed to provide a loan equivalent to 300 million Swiss francs to support expansion projects in Italy.
The strong Swiss franc is also causing headaches for those responsible for rail logistics.
Costs are incurred in francs, while revenues are in euros.
In addition, low diesel prices reduce the attractiveness of the railways relative to transport by road.
But the railways are not without their challenges.
The Swiss rail network is the most heavily traveled in the world, and while passenger trains travel through the Gotthard Base Tunnel at speeds of up to 200 km/h, freight trains cannot exceed approximately 100 km/h.
The greater the difference in speed, the greater the distance that must be maintained between trains to prevent one from overtaking another.
The design allows for six freight trains and two passenger trains to travel through the tunnel each hour and in each direction.
The freight trains will be kept in holding areas at either end of the tunnel and then sent through the tunnel between the passenger trains, which will run every half hour.
Necessary, If Not Yet at the Goal Another reason for the likely increase in the volume of freight transported is the growing appeal of ports in northern Italy.
Those ports have played a relatively minor role in trade between Europe and the Far East so far, owing to the large capacity of ports in northern Europe.
With Rotterdam, Hamburg and Antwerp reaching the limits of their capacity, however, and with the NEAT Gotthard Base Tunnel to open soon, investments in Italian port facilities and transport infrastructure have risen sharply.
The bottom line is this:
More and more freight will be transported through the Alps.
The burden on the roads will not be reduced as much as originally envisioned.
But it is important to note that without NEAT, we would soon reach a point at which no one would choose to drive to Ticino unless absolutely necessary.
There would be a lineup of trucks stretching from Basel to Lugano.
AUTHOR:
SIMON HURST
ECONOMIC RESEARCH TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION
THROUGH THE WALL
Tunnel construction is one of the things Switzerland does best.
Not quite so clear, on the other hand, is the economic benefit of these expensive construction projects.
Through the middle of the 20th century, construction of tunnels in Switzerland was limited almost exclusively to railway tunnels.
Then beginning in 1980, hundreds of kilometers of road tunnels were added to the national transportation network along with the expansion of the interstate system.
Now a second era of the railway tunnel is dawning with the NEAT.
Between the years 2000 and 2020, total tunnel length is set to double from 400 to some 800 kilometers.
As it happens, the Vereina Tunnel did result in a higher number of overnight stays in the Lower Engadine.
Direct effects to the rest of the economy, however, could not be ascertained.
Accessibility is in fact a locational factor – but remains only one of many.
The Lessons of Lötschberg There is scarcely any comparison between the Gotthard Base Tunnel and the projects mentioned above.
It was not designed to be an alternative to an avalanche-prone pass road but rather to relieve a highly traveled transit route.
In order to assess the impacts on the neighboring regions, the best option is to consider the Lötschberg Base Tunnel between Frutigen (Bern) and Raron (Valais) – the second NEAT axis.
In effect, the Lötschberg Base Tunnel moved the Canton of Valais closer to the metropolitan centers of the Mittelland central plateau.
And accordingly, the effects can be seen mostly in the southern canton.
Travel times have Swiss tunnel lengths
Total tunnel length in km
1,000 750 500 250 0 Railway tunnels Roadway tunnels 1850 – 1889 been shortened by 30 to 60 minutes, making it possible to live in Brig and to work in Bern.
Leisure travel has seen an even greater increase.
The number of day trippers and multi-day tourists in the Canton of Valais has increased.
Just how much of that is attributable to the tunnel is difficult to say.
To find out more, users of the Lötschberg Base Tunnel were quizzed on their travel habits.
Of those surveyed, two out of three responded that they would have simply used the former mountain route rather than the new base tunnel.
But what happens in the regions along the mountain route?
Here, too, a comparison with Lötschberg:
Overnight stays and populations remained level in Kandertal and in Lötschental, where there had been fears that tourism would suffer.
Leventina on the southern side of the Gotthard Pass also has concerns about its potential, while Uri hopes to see an increase in tourism from the south.
Yet with the Gotthard, too, no major upheavals can be expected.
Despite their location on a highly traveled north-south route, the situation in the regions on both sides of the Gotthard Tunnel was no bed of roses to begin with, even before the NEAT.
The megatrends of recent decades – migration towards the regional metropolitan centers, aging and rising unemployment – are likely to be at least as pivotal for the future of the region as the opening of the base tunnel.
The quality of the Swiss transportation network is already above average, so that the effect of improvements and expansions is not as pronounced as it would be if it had been necessary to begin at a lower level.
AUTHOR:
SIMON HURST
1890 – 1929 1930 – 1969 1970 – 2019
Source:
Swiss Tunneling Society
ECONOMIC RESEARCH BELLINZONA DEVELOPMENT AREA
A NEW GATEWAY TO TICINO
A new connection is bringing Bellinzona closer to German-speaking Switzerland.
But the new railway link through the Alps, known as NEAT, is having a much greater effect within Ticino itself.
The new train station in Bellinzona will open in 2016 (visualization).
The Gotthard Railway triggered a boom in Bellinzona at the beginning of the 20th century.
Most new jobs were related to the railway itself; the workshops quickly became the region ’s most important employers, and, along with the cantonal administration, they remain so to this day.
However, many other industrial companies also profited from their location on the north-south axis.
In addition, the railway made Ticino accessible to tourists.
The population of Bellinzona quickly grew.
At the time, nobody anticipated that more than a century later the city would become a major NEAT hub.
The original plan called for the NEAT trains to detour around Ticino ’s capital via another tunnel through the mountain flank west of the city – in part to shield the densely populated area from noise.
A new railway station was to be built in Camorino, a hub southeast of Bellinzona.
There, before the north portal of the Ceneri Base Tunnel, the tracks to Lugano, Locarno and Bellinzona come together.
Against the wishes of Ticino, this detour was cut from the NEAT program.
As a result, coming from the north, Bellinzona is the first stop after the Gotthard Base Tunnel.
In terms of bringing outsiders to town, if it does so at all, the new tunnel will favor day-trippers and weekend tourists.
Although travel time is greatly reduced, the business centers of German-speaking Switzerland are still too far away to be convenient for commuters.
Meanwhile, even when joined by the tunnel, the Uri Valley and Bellinzona are too small to merge into an economic region of their own.
On the other hand, within Ticino itself the situation is quite different.
Bellinzona – like the other regions of northern Ticino – ranks below average as a location for business, in part because accessibility, the availability of a highly qualified workforce and attractive tax conditions are relatively limited.
The new railway connection improves the situation, because the base tunnels improve accessibility to the north and especially to the south.
Double the Number of Passengers?
The travel time to Lugano through the Ceneri Base Tunnel will drop by half, to just 12 minutes in 2020.
The NEAT will thus have strong regional effects in Ticino.
In addition to providing a transit link between two distinct regions, the Ceneri Base Tunnel might contribute to the consolidation of northern and southern Ticino as economic areas.
As Bellinzona takes on its role as a gateway to the south, the city is completely renovating its railway station.
Longer platforms and an additional track are increasing its capacity, while a modern station building offers space for shops and offices.
The NEAT is expected to double the number of passengers within ten years – and Bellinzona hopes to welcome them in style.
A larger bus terminal and many new public transportation connections will follow, according to the plans.
The railway station buildings alone cost 36 million Swiss francs.
In addition, the city plans to upgrade its sightseeing attractions and draw additional tourists.
Bellinzona plans to reorganize politically as well:
The consolidation of 16 agglomeration communes to form a city of 50,000 inhabitants has surmounted the first political hurdles.
As a result, Ticino and Bellinzona could see more dynamic economic development in the coming years.
The region already ranks second only to Lugano in population growth in the canton, a trend that will continue as Bellinzona becomes an active NEAT hub.
AUTHOR:
SIMON HURST
ECONOMIC RESEARCH TOURISM
A DAY IN THE SUN
The number of day trips to Ticino can be expected to increase.
Hotels may also benefit if they make certain adjustments.
South of the Alps, the sun shines around oneand-a-half times as often as it does in northern Switzerland.
Weary of foggy weather, people from the German-speaking region of Switzerland are willing to travel fairly long distances to get away for a day.
And of course, Ticino has more to offer tourists than just sunshine.
Travel time is crucial when planning an excursion, since at some point it is n’t worthwhile to make the trip unless you spend the night.
According to the Swiss Federal Statistical Office, 47 percent of day trips take no more than an hour each way.
Only eight percent of day-trippers are willing to spend two hours and 41 minutes, one way, on the train – the time it now takes to go from Zurich to Lugano.
With NEAT, travel time will drop to an hour and 49 minutes, making Ticino a much more attractive destination for a casual day trip; this is acceptable to 25 percent of potential visitors.
With NEAT reducing the time spent traveling, the number of visitors to the Bellinzona region will increase by 380,000, or 73 percent.
The number of people who would consider taking a day trip to Locarno, a popular tourist destination, would rise by 260,000; 315,000 more people would be willing to travel to Lugano.
Quicker in Both Directions The implications for hotels are less clear:
Potential overnight guests can reach their destinations faster, but they can return home just as quickly.
People from the German-speaking region of Switzerland – the largest group of visitors to Ticino – could visit an attraction like Lugano ’s new cultural center LAC and return home the same day.
However, it takes so long to reach most of the urban areas north of the Gotthard that a substantial number of tourists would elect to stay overnight.
Accordingly, Credit Suisse Economic Research Expansion of tourist regions per km2, public transportation, changes between the 2016 train schedule and the proposed 2020 schedule
Sarnen Number of day-trippers in the region will increase by 0 180,000 Gotthard Base Tunnel 380,000 Stans Locarno Altdorf does not expect to see a decline in the total number of overnight stays.
Certainly the Lötschberg Base Tunnel did not have that effect.
If Ticino ’s hotels seize this opportunity to appeal to NEAT users, the new base tunnel may well increase their business.
Vacation destinations in Uri and the Leventina valley will see little change, since visitors will continue to use the old Gotthard route – which might itself become a tourist attraction:
SBB Historic plans to display Swiss “crocodile” locomotives and other Gotthard legends in a theme park setting.
AUTHORS:
THOMAS RÜHL AND JAN SCHÜPBACH
Ceneri Base Tunnel Lugano Bellinzona Chiasso Chur
Source:
search.
ch, Geostat, Credit Suisse
ECONOMIC RESEARCH LABOR MARKET
FLEXIBLE WORK AND THE NEAT
The importance of being physically present at work every day is dwindling.
New technologies have initiated drastic changes in how we work.
Better accessibility opens up completely new options.
Labor Market Trends
23% of Swiss employees currently work partially from home.
42% of Swiss employees could organize their work more flexibly in the future
The vision of a fragmented working world:
Employees Working groups Networks Companies
(Uri:
35%; Ticino 42%).
The working world is in a state of transition.
New information and communication technologies, changing lifestyles and a growing proportion of knowledge-based professions have allowed a multitude of flexible forms of employment to emerge.
Practically 50 percent of the labor force in Switzerland is currently engaged in modern forms of work (self-employment, part-time and temporary employment), a figure exceeded within the OECD area only by the Netherlands.
And some 23 percent of Swiss employees already take advantage of the opportunity to do a portion of their work from home.
Traffic congestion on the roadways and in public transportation as a result of the growing number of commuters has served to amplify this trend.
At the same time, the percentage of working parents is on the rise, which is becoming a pivotal challenge for balancing career and family when the home and workplace are not the same.
In this regard, better accessibility on the north-south axis provides new options to those living in the affected regions.
When it becomes possible to work remotely, peripheral regions are also able to position themselves as high quality residential areas.
Employees who are allowed to perform part of their work from home or at a nearby location are not forced to move closer to their workplace or can commute less frequently, albeit over longer distances.
Over the last ten years, around 400 people moved from the canton of Ticino to the Zurich-Zug region:
55 percent of the people who relocated are highly qualified graduates of institutes of higher learning, employed mainly in financial and business services, trade and transport, and in the public sector.
Employees in these sectors make up the majority of commuters from Ticino to the Zurich-Zug area (around 1,500 in total), although 54 percent do not return to their home canton on a daily basis during the week.
The potential for flexible, location-independent work in a region increases proportionally with the share of employees working in the knowledge sector.
These are primarily traditional office workers and modern services.
The industrial sector, however, represents a potential that should not be underestimated.
Production-related services are becoming more significant, from needs analysis and teleservice to completely operating facilities for customers.
By analyzing the employee structure according to activity characteristics, we estimate that in the future 41.8 percent of employees in Switzerland will be able to organize their work more flexibly in terms of time and place.
In Ticino and Uri, that share is 42.3 percent and 34.5 percent.
Work is becoming more flexible, driven in part by the increasingly overloaded city centers and the rising environmental and digital consciousness.
It is possible that the working world of the future will be a highly fragmented one, made up of a multitude of networks and small, highly specialized providers offering their services on a projectby-project basis, with only the core functions remaining within the companies.
AUTHOR:
SARA CARNAZZI WEBER
Stories from the Inside
Thousands of workers and specialists and millions of tons of stone – the Gotthard Base Tunnel (GBT) is the result of a complex collaboration.
Six contractors talk about the special motivation and challenges presented by this once-in-a-century project.
By Simon Brunner (interviews) and Anne Morgenstern (photos)
STRABAG AG SWITZERLAND WHAT:
The Strabag Group is one of Europe ’s leading technology groups for construction services (sales revenue:
EUR 14 billion/ 73,300 employees).
Strabag Switzerland is involved in the planning and execution of work in all areas of the construction industry.
WHERE:
Schlieren SINCE:
1835 EMPLOYEES:
1,350 (Switzerland)
What was Strabag ’s role in the GBT project?
Strabag AG Austria and Strabag AG Tunnelbau Switzerland received the awards for construction of the Amsteg and Erstfeld sections.
So we were the sole contractor for the entire northern side of the GBT.
Order volume:
CHF 1,100 million
What makes tunnel construction different from other types of construction?
There ’s an old tunnel digger ’s adage that says “You do n’t know how things will look until you start digging.”
Building a tunnel is one of the most challenging and riskiest projects there is.
Did anything go wrong?
“The mountain is stronger” – that ’s another adage we had to accept.
On the one hand, we set a single-day GBT record at the Erstfeld construction section by STRABAG AG SWITZERLAND, Peter Murer
ELKUCH GROUP, Günther Elkuch drilling 56 meters.
However, the same tunnel boring machine that set this record became trapped in Amsteg.
Within a single meter, the geological conditions changed from hard, stable gneiss to loose gravel, which flooded into the tunnel like a mudslide, blocking the drill head of the machine.
Despite its 5,000 hp, it was powerless.
Using ingenuity, engineering skill and a lot of elbow grease, the team managed to free the colossus from the mountain ’s grip in six months.
Answers by Peter Murer, Chairman of the Board of Directors
ELKUCH GROUP WHAT:
The Elkuch Group consists of seven sheet metal companies.
Elkuch Bator AG develops industrial and fire doors.
It played a leading role in the GBT order.
WHERE:
Bendern, Liechtenstein (Group) /Herzogenbuchsee (Bator AG) SINCE:
1949 EMPLOYEES:
&gt; 350
What was Elkuch ’s role in the GBT project?
We produced some 750 doors and gates, including 353 doors that connect the two main tubes every 320 meters.
We also made the 24 doors used at emergency stop stations and the four 68-meter, 22-ton gates in the lane change sections.
Was this project different from other orders?
We often had to come up with brand new solutions because there simply were n’t any standards or rules for high-speed rail lines in tunnels.
For example, in a tunnel a train acts like a bullet in a gun barrel.
An enormous amount of pressure builds up in a short period of time, moving back and forth in waves through the tunnel.
If there are several trains traveling at the same time, these waves of pressure overlap – which puts an enormous amount of strain on the infrastructure.
So first we had to determine how this affected the lifespan of the individual components.
What sticks in your mind?
Tunnelers are unique people.
They spend nearly their entire day in the dark, and it ’s as hot as a sauna.
This experience transforms them into a tight-knit community of team-oriented individuals.
They ’re always celebrating milestones, like the last “golden” sleeper.
We were so fascinated with this ritual that we decided to celebrate something similar as well:
the installation of the last ‒ i.
e.
, the golden ‒ door leaf.
It was a small but powerful gesture that was very well received.
Answers by Günther Elkuch, Chairman of the Board of Directors
REX ARTICOLI TECNICI SA WHAT:
Development and production of technical products made from rubber and thermoplastics WHERE:
Mendrisio SINCE:
1935 EMPLOYEES:
&gt; 100
What role did Rex play in the GBT project?
We manufactured and delivered all 380,000 rubber sleeper boots.
As the name implies, the tracks lie on these “boots.”
The ballastless superstructure of the GBT is a special feature:
There are no stones between the tracks as there normally would be.
This type of construction requires very little maintenance.
How important was this order for you?
It was the largest order ever in the 80-year history of the company.
We ’re talking about a total of more than CHF 4.5 million in revenue.
What ’s unique is that the entire order only filled two pages.
A similar order in another country would have been as long as half a novel.
How did you organize the transport to and from the construction site?
It was a constant challenge to organize.
It involved a huge number of people; I ’ve rarely seen a working atmosphere like that one.
And the assembly machines built especially for this project were simply amazing.
Answers by Marco Favini, Chairman of the Board of Directors
AGIR AGGREGAT AG (AAA) WHAT:
AAA is one of the leading providers of logistics systems for larger construction sites WHERE:
Gurtnellen SINCE:
1967 EMPLOYEES:
350
What role did AAA play in the GBT project?
We carried out orders worth CHF 380 million, moving 20.1 million tons or around 80 percent of the material, such as rock and waste water, from the tunnel, or using it to make concrete aggregate.
What is your favorite story?
There was a small language problem, which is not unusual at a construction site.
We wanted to install six containers at the construction site, and we needed the approval of the construction site management team.
But our request for “säggs Container,” as we say in Swiss German, was understood by the German con struction site management staff as “sex containers.”
Of course, they were adamant that we could not set up sex containers at the construction site.
We did n’t understand why it was a problem to set up six containers.
It took quite some time before we understood what the problem was.
What was the biggest challenge?
Avoiding accidents and deaths.
Every single accident has a huge impact at a large construction site, where we all get to know one another at some point.
So the celebration on December 4 of Saint Barbara, the patron saint of construction workers, is important for everyone – even though the majority of the workers are n’t religious.
Answers by Andreas Meyer, Managing Director
AGIR AGGREGAT AG (AAA), Andreas Meyer also invited to all of the ceremonies and celebrations.
That was really nice.
What relationship does your company have with the Gotthard Tunnel?
The year Tenconi SA Airolo was founded is the same year that construction of the first Gotthard rail tunnel started.
The Tenconi brothers, who were blacksmiths by trade, took part in this epic construction project, moving from Liguria to Airolo, where there seems to have been plenty of work.
Answers by Fabrizio Lucchini, Sales Director
TENCONI SA, Fabrizio Lucchini TENCONI SA WHAT:
Steel and mechanical engineering, specialized in the rail business WHERE:
Airolo SINCE:
1871 EMPLOYEES:
130
What role did Tenconi SA play in the GBT project?
We manufactured mechanical components for the tunnel drilling machines, repaired damaged parts, produced service parts, built boring jigs, welded steel components, constructed separation walls for ventilation, and much more, all at the southern end of the project.
What are you most proud of?
Tenconi is valued for our straightforwardness, reliability, adherence to deadlines, and the quality of the work we deliver – and, above all, for our versatility.
We were called to the tunnel numerous times to discuss problems at the site.
We were WOERTZ WHAT:
Manufacturer of electrical systems, building automation systems, and fire safety systems WHERE:
Muttenz SINCE:
1928 EMPLOYEES:
230
What role did Woertz play in the GBT project?
We were responsible for the wiring for the emergency lighting and for installing fire safety cables and connection boxes.
What was the biggest challenge?
Adapting to changing requirements.
We had to develop new connection boxes that meet the high technical requirements, while simultaneously ensuring maximum time and cost savings during installation.
Among other things, this involved delivering the lamps and flat cable connection boxes to the construction site pre-wired so the lights only had to be attached and the boxes placed on the flat cable to make electrical contact.
In what ways did you sense the magnitude of this project?
The competition was strong, and price and time pressure enormous.
In addition, there was high demand to develop specific products according to detailed requirements.
Answers by Tamas Onodi, Managing Director
The Saint and the Devil
In our modern age of mobility, there are few Christian saints whose names are encountered more often than that of St. Gotthard, the namesake for the “king of mountain passes.”
Godehard, as he was known in Old High German, lived in the 10th and 11th centuries.
By Hansjörg Schultz
The first mention of a tion between Godehard, bishop of Hildesheim, and the Gotthard Pass came in the year 1236.
A Benedictine monk from Bremen had traveled to the pope in Rome to ask for forgiveness of his sins.
After hearing the name of the Gotthard Pass on his arduous journey home, by way of Bellinzona, Airolo and Lucerne, he spread the word upon returning to the north.
In 1230, a chapel believed to have been erected in the 11th 1th century was con- connecsecrated to St. Godehard by the Archbishop of Milan.
During that t same period, a hostel was built.
It was run by monks and offered travelers a place to stay.
Gotthard – Godehard, in Old High German – of Hildesheim eim was born in 960 to a poor farming family in Reichersdorf, a village in Lower Bavaria.
At the age of 30, he entered a Benedictine monastery, soon rising to become its prior.
He was widely described as a reformer, having embraced the ideas of the reform move- ment that began at Cluny Abbey in Burgundy, which emphasized the importance of helping the poor.
Emperor Henry II named the 62-year-old Godehard bishop of Hildesheim in 1022.
During his 16 years as bishop, Godehard was active in promoting building projects, including expanding the cathedral and erecting ecting more than 30 new churches.
Overall, his tenure as bishop, serving in a major episcopate under the Saxon ors, was a time of great achievement.
Architectural and artistic treasures from his era still shape the Hildesheim of today.
emper- St. Gotthard was born to a poor farming family (statue from St. Godehard church, Hildesheim)
According to contemporary sources, Godehard was even-tempered and cheerful.
Numerous legends have sprung up about him.
He is usually depicted as a bishop carrying hot coals in his cloak, a reference to the story that as an altar boy, he carried burning coals to the censer in his robe.
The legend is that he remained utterly unharmed.
Bishop Godehard died on May 5, 1038, at 76 – an advanced age for his time.
He was buried in Hildesheim Cathedral.
He is still remembered on the 5th of May by both Catholics and Protestants.
Godehard was canonized by Pope Innocent II in 1131.
St. Godehard church in Hildesheim was erected in his honor.
Numerous towns and churches have been named after St. Godehard – including in the Scandinavian countries and Italy.
And, as we have noted, the gateway to Italy was named after him.
The chapel at the crest of the Gotthard Pass was dedicated to him, and shortly thereafter – the first mention was in 1236 – a hostel for pilgrims traveling to Rome was built.
Beginning in the 17th century, it was run as an inn by Capuchin monks.
Because of the snowy weather, the monks were given special permission to wear shoes.
One legend has it that Bishop Gode- hard would even wake the dead so that they could confess their sins.
In ad- dition to being the patron saint of the Gotthard Pass, he is invoked against lightning and hail, rheuma- tism, gout and difficult childbirth.
One statue of Godehard shows him ramming his shepherd’s staff down the throat of the devil, depicted as a dragon lying at his feet.
And that men- tion of the devil brings us back to the Gotthard Pass – where a perilous bridge over the Schöllenen Gorge is known as Devil’s Bridge.
The saint and the devil – in the long history of the Gotthard Pass, there is surely room for both.
Hansjörg Schultz is an editor and moderator for SRF 2 Culture radio.
He was formerly the moderator for the TV program “Sternstunde Religion,” and until the beginning of 2014, he was the religion editor for Schweizer Radio and SRF television.
Heart of Swissness
For transportation planners, the Gotthard represents the shortest route from north to south.
For Swiss writers, it ’s much less prosaic – and a central theme of their work.
Seven groundbreaking literary works about “Switzerland ’s Sinai” and one about another Swiss tunnel.
By Daniele Muscionico (text) and Maiko Gubler (illustration)
What would Switzerland be without the literary shadow cast by the Gotthard?
It ’s a terrible thing to contemplate.
Perhaps it would simply be a country like any other.
The fabled Gotthard mountain range is a central theme for German-speaking Swiss writers – as monumental, in its own way, as the mountain itself.
“What does the Gotthard mean to you?”
That ’s the crucial question for writers on both sides of the Alps.
Writer Peter von Matt, Switzerland ’s best-known scholar in the field of German literature, refers to the Gotthard as “Switzerland ’s Sinai.”
Other commentators have described it in similarly colorful terms.
Strikingly, male authors tend to take a biographical approach when writing about this monumental granite formation that is so much a part of Helvetia ’s identity, while their female colleagues seem to be motivated by fantasy rather than biography.
Italian-language writers in Ticino like Piero Bianconi, Plinio Martini and Alberto Nessi have described the Gotthard as a social space, particularly in the last century.
This theme is rarely found in the contemporary literature of Switzerland ’s southern and western regions.
In German-language Swiss literature, however, there is a Gotthard story and a Gotthard perspective to satisfy every taste.
The following examples are all contemporary in nature, whether they are new discoveries, rediscoveries, modern classics or science fiction.
For Classicists
Rolf Dobelli — “Massimo Marini”
Fate is cruel – as the ancient Greeks repeatedly emphasized in their tragedies.
Rolf Dobelli (born in 1966) obviously comes from a different era, but his novel shares some of the violence of a Greek tragedy.
Dobelli narrates the life of Massimo Marini in a political story that shines a light on the complexities of Swiss society in the second half of the 20th century.
The author touches on topics as varied as integration, issues related to immigration and guest workers and a man ’s Oedipal destiny, and even a soap opera involving a beautiful cellist at Zurich ’s opera house.
Rolf Dobelli Massimo Marini Roman · Diogenes
“The story of Marini ’s rise and fall is set against the backdrop of the Gotthard mountain range.”
In the 1950s, the book ’s protagonist, Marini, was smuggled into Switzerland in a suitcase as an infant by his parents, who were seasonal workers from Apulia.
The story of his rise and fall is set against the backdrop of the Gotthard mountain range.
And as fate would have it, Marini and the workers at his construction company will later build the Gotthard Base Tunnel.
They manage to connect Italy and Switzerland – the country of Marini ’s birth and his new home – and to make a political and technical miracle a reality.
Yet Marini ’s personal story ends tragically:
He is a man without an identity.
This is the story of someone who scaled the heights – and then hit rock bottom.
Rolf Dobelli ’s characterization of the Gotthard is that of a skeptic:
“You can only find a true home if you are able to leave behind the ‘ massif central’of your past,” he writes.
That is something his protagonist is unable to do.
But it is n’t Marini ’s fault; fate simply does not shine on him.
Greek tragedy echoes throughout the Gotthard mountain range in the tale.
For Theologians
Friedrich Dürrenmatt — “The Tunnel” and “The Winter War in Tibet”
This is Friedrich Dürrenmatt at his best:
A train is thundering along without an engineer in what, under normal circumstances, should be a short tunnel (not the Gotthard), carrying unsuspecting passengers (“We were still sitting in our compartments and had no idea it was all over”).
The train hurtles forward, picking up speed, and as it moves faster and faster, the tunnel seems to grow longer and longer.
With disaster imminent, the chief conductor asks a young passenger, a student, the crucial question:
“What are we to do?”
“Nothing,” came the merciless reply.
Nothing, the student says, “not turning away from the deadly spectacle below, yet not without a certain ghostly cheerfulness.
Bits of glass from the shattered control panel now studded his body.”
The narrator ’s laconic, dispassionate, knowing response:
“Nothing.
God has let us fall, and now we are rushing toward Him.”
In his surreal short story “The Tunnel,” Friedrich Dürrenmatt (1921 – 1990) brings a young student first to despair – and then to God.
And in the face of God and disaster, Dürrenmatt is even able to find the humor in the situation for a brief moment.
How does he accomplish this?
He juxtaposes the absurd and the normal.
He introduces a surreal event into a reallife scenario.
A parable of the paradoxical meaninglessness of human life, the story takes place inside a mountain, in the dark, in a situation of absolute disorientation.
There it becomes clear that aimlessness is the aim of every human life.
But that insight in itself brings one closer to God.
Friedrich Dürrenmatt Der Tunnel und andere Meistererzählungen Diogenes
“Nothing.
God has let us fall, and now we are rushing toward Him.”
Much sharper in tone is a portrayal of a mountain interior that Dürrenmatt wrote years later.
In Selected Writings, Volume 3, the author creates a biting, imaginative political satire depicting a post-World War III Switzerland.
The first-person narrator is a soldier of fortune who has been fighting for 20, perhaps 30 years in the mountains of Tibet.
“The Winter War in Tibet” is a never-ending nightmare set in underground labyrinths and multi-level shafts – quintessential Dürrenmatt.
It is no secret that it was inspired by the Gotthard mountain range.
In the story, the Swiss government has retreated to a bunker in the Alpine fortress, located underneath the Blüemlisalp massif.
Dürrenmatt ’s mountain allegory is also intended as an allegory of the world itself.
But it is equally about the bizarre nature of being spared.
For Poets
Gertrud Leutenegger — “Gleich nach dem Gotthard kommt der Mailänder Dom” (“Milan ’s cathedral is right behind the Gotthard.”
)
This first-person narration begins with the description of a busy street leading through the narrator ’s childhood.
The event happens just outside the garden.
As cars roll by, brakes screech and metal crashes against metal.
A mother, distraught, gets up from her recliner, covering her face with her hands.
The residents pour out of the village.
One by one, carrying mountains of pillows, they rush to the scene of the accident.
Where are they rushing to for their next dose of death?
The childhood street has only one signpost:
Gotthard – Italy.
Where are they going?
An answer to the girl ’s question is found only much later, in her father ’s photo album:
She recognizes a “gigantic sugar-covered city.”
This city must be located behind the tunnel.
The people who built it must have had their eyesight sharpened in long nights spent in the tunnel, bathed in the reflection of the glaciers’snow and the icy summit of the Gotthard mountain range.
That is what the child imagines this unearthly city to be like.
Later, after an incredulous look at the map on her classroom wall, she insists that she “knows better”:
“Milan ’s cathedral is right behind the Gotthard.”
Gertrud Leutenegger Gleich nach dem Gotthard kommt der Mailänder Dom
Suhrkamp
“In the story, the God-given bulwark that is the Gotthard mountain range is incomparably light.”
In this brief but powerful story by Gertrud Leutenegger (born in 1948), the God-given bulwark that is the Gotthard mountain range is incomparably light.
A child ’s fantasy tells us that the Gotthard, Switzerland ’s “holy mountain” that carries such a heavy burden, is whatever we imagine it to be.
Leutenegger juxtaposes lightness and weight, ideology and subjectivity.
She shows the reader that the specific gravity of any story, any legend, any myth is just as light, or heavy, as we perceive it to be.
For Dreamers
Christian Kracht — “Ich werde hier sein im Sonnenschein und im Schatten” (“I ’ll be here in sunshine and in shadow”)
This young Swiss writer with German roots has always been more inclined toward megalomania than to the exaggerated humility that characterizes many Swiss.
Kracht (born in 1966) has written a book that is no more and no less than a history book that argues against history, taking the title from the German lyrics to “Danny Boy”:
“Ich werde hier sein im Sonnenschein und im Schatten.”
Those who lack a sense of irony might instead describe it as an outrageous requiem for “bunker Switzerland.”
“Other great nations in history have built pyramids; we dig tunnels.”
With equal parts cleverness and folly, Kracht invents a version of Swiss history that is so abstruse that it is impossible to summarize.
Suffice it to say that the author ’s Switzerland – indeed, the entire world – has been “Bolshevized” by Zurich ’s exiled revolutionary Lenin, and the result is never-ending war.
A party official from “New Bern” is ordered to arrest a disloyal colonel.
The author has no doubt learned from his country about the strategic importance of tunnels, for the military and the infrastructure.
“Other great nations in history built pyramids,” the book ’s narrator tells us.
“We dig tunnels.”
During the war years, the country, our country, was reduced to the territory of the “Réduit suisse” – Switzerland ’s National Redoubt, a defensive mountain stronghold – which Kracht calls the “epic feat of the Swiss – the core, breeding ground and expression of our existence.”
The fugitive, this ideologically fragile colonel takes refuge in the tunnel – this defensive structure, this one-time symbol of power that Switzerland built as an Alpine fortress during the Second World War.
There is no need for the audacious author to attach the name “Gotthard” to this enormous joke; his intention is obvious in every line.
Kracht ’s Gotthard fantasy is as utopian as the Gotthard project itself in its time.
For fans of erotica
Hermann Burger — “Die Künstliche Mutter” (“The Artificial Mothers”)
Here caricature and madness come together in a literal encounter in the mountain.
What may seem pedantic in the works of Dürrenmatt and Frisch is light and breezy in this novel by Hermann Burger (1942 – 1989), which deals with the perennial Swiss themes of masculinity, identity and homeland.
The story ’s setting, an abandoned military fortress, is clearly based on the Gotthard, and one of the Gotthard ’s tunnels is used for erotic therapy.
“One of the Gotthard ’s tunnels is used for erotic therapy.”
The main character in Burger ’s massive volume is Wolfram Schöllkopf, a lecturer in German studies and glaciology.
He is looking for healing from the primordial mother, the bosom of the republic – having been denied love by his own mother.
Suffering a breakdown after losing his job at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, Schöllkopf seeks salvation in the Gotthard and the “Gotthard sisters.”
He is attracted to one of them in particular, a Germanic “creature of light,” a blonde woman named “Dagmar Dom.”
Some may recognize in her a caricature of German news anchor Dagmar Berghoff.
Schöllkopf hopes that she will relieve his suffering and help him find a new life.
Perhaps her “tunnel therapy” will heal him – perhaps it will cure a mysterious ailment that has plagued him for years, a “pelvic migraine”:
Schöllkopf is impotent.
Burger ’s ironic reinterpretation of the redoubt myth combines with the desire to be liberated once and for all from the narrow confines of Switzerland.
The warmth of the mountain ’s interior, the “massif-uterus,” ultimately enables the author ’s alter ego, the emotionally numb, cerebral Schöllkopf, to do great things:
Schöllkopf “explodes like a double rocket” in Ticino.
He is reborn as an Italianized, two-fold “Armando” (“the rearmed one”).
And the mountain?
Rather than exploding, it collapses in a manner that is both elegant and efficient:
It disintegrates from within.
For Contemporaries
Zora del Buono — “Gotthard”
This brief novella is like a timetable of events.
Ideally, it should be read while riding the train through the new Gotthard rail tunnel.
Zora del Buono (born in 1962), a Zurich writer who lives in Berlin, not only knows how to write; she also knows what to write for the modern age.
Del Buono is an architect and former construction supervisor, and her professional insights inform her narration of the incredible events and human stories and entanglements that take place at a construction site at the southern entrance to the Gotthard Base Tunnel.
Del Buono ’s work is a joy to read, both in its craft and its depth.
The action in this charming and provocative story takes place on a single day over precisely 6 hours and 23 minutes.
“Amusement, sophistication, sensuousness and the ability to tell a story.”
Over that brief period, one person suffers a vivid and outrageous death, men engage in indecencies – and along the way, a longago murder is solved.
With amusement, sophistication, sensuousness and the ability to tell a story with a mining engineer ’s precision, del Buono has written the book of the year 2015 about the mountain of the century.
Bibliography:
— Rolf Dobelli.
“Massimo Marini.”
Zurich, Diogenes, 2010.
— Friedrich Dürrenmatt.
“The Tunnel.”
In:
“Selected Writings, Volume 2, Fictions.”
Translated by Joel Agee, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 2006.
— Friedrich Dürrenmatt.
“The Winter War in Tibet.”
In:
“Selected Writings, Volume 3, Essays.”
Translated by Joel Agee, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 2006.
— Gertrud Leutenegger.
“Gleich nach dem Gotthard kommt der Mailänder Dom.
Geschichten und andere Prosa.”
Frankfurt am Main, Suhrkamp, 2006.
— Christian Kracht.
“Ich werde hier sein im Sonnenschein und im Schatten.”
Cologne, Verlag Kiepenheuer&amp;Witsch, 2008.
— Hermann Burger.
“Die Künstliche Mutter.”
Zurich, Nagel&amp;Kimche, 2014.
— Zora del Buono.
“Gotthard.”
Munich, C.
H.
Beck, 2015.
Daniele Muscionico is an award-winning journalist who writes about art and culture for the Neue Zürcher Zeitung.
Cover images:
Diogenes (3); Suhrkamp; Verlag Kiepenheuer &amp;Witsch; Nagel &amp;Kimche; C.
H.
Beck
Gotthard is everywhere
Gotthard Street, Sugarcreek, Ohio, USA St. Gotthard Way, Ceres, California, USA Saint Gotthard Avenue, Anchorage, Alaska, USA Saint Gotthard Street, Soweto, South Africa Saint Gotthards Avenue, Martlesham, Ipswich, UK Sankt Gotthard im Mühlkreis, Austria
It ’s a big mountain for Switzerland, but only an ordinary street somewhere else in the world:
Where the Gotthard can be found in other places around the globe.
Szentgotthárd, Hungary Gothard Street, Huntington Beach, California, USA Gothard Street, Vancouver, Canada Saint Gothard Road, London, UK Saint Gothard, Dawes Close, Dobwalls, UK Gotthardt Street, Newark, New Jersey, USA
Animals Underground
Humans build tunnels to pass through mountains and under bodies of water.
Animals build them as safe havens from enemies and harsh environmental conditions.
By Herbert Cerutti
The European badger is a champion among tunnel builders.
With a stocky physique, narrow head, and trunk-like snout, the badger uses its elongated, curved claws to dig a labyrinth of underground burrows.
It hides out there during the day and waits until dusk to emerge for a feeding frenzy.
Its favorite foods include beetles and worms, wasps’nests, berries and windfall.
It was long believed that the European badger was a hermit, mingling with other badgers only to reproduce.
Newer research suggests, however, that “brock” forages for food alone but enjoys plenty of company while hiding out during the day or hibernating in its den or sett over the winter.
Couples mate for life and there are even social clans with up to a dozen animals.
In the west of England there is an exposed burrow that shows the extent of the badger ’s residence.
Twelve entrances and exits led to 94 tunnels with a total length of 310 meters.
Twenty-three rooms cushioned with leaves provided a comfortable place to sleep, while numerous separate latrines kept everywhere else clean.
Bones have been found that indicate some badger dens have been populated for centuries.
One karst cave near Bristol in the southwest of England has even been host to European badgers for tens of thousands of years.
Sly tenant:
The fox is glad to take up residence in the badger ’s luxurious den.
Likable Landlord The European badger is good-natured, as shown by its tolerance for its tenant:
the sly fox.
The fox is glad to make use of its forest friend ’s underground network
Badgers are fastidious and peaceful, building extensive underground networks to live in.
and has no problem taking up residence there.
To keep from getting on each other ’s nerves, the fox and badger live as far apart as possible in the dens with separate entrances.
However, their different natures – the badger is a fastidious and peaceful sort, while the fox loves action and drags its bloody prey into the house – can cause a tussle.
Nonetheless, young foxes and badgers have been known to play nicely with one another.
The badger-fox underground cohabitation sometimes results in a nasty surprise for hunters.
During hunts with terriers and dachshunds bred especially for the sport, the dogs slip into the tunnels while the hunters wait, gun poised, at one of the tunnel ’s exits.
While the fox generally flees from the habitat, the badger stands its ground.
If the dog persists, the badger will use its dagger-like claws and sharp teeth to get the point across.
It might even quickly turn its hindquarters toward the dog and dig furiously to throw dirt and rocks into its face.
Just like that, the tunnel is closed off to the dogs.
If the dog starts to dig, it ’s digging its own grave:
The frantic efforts pile up so much dirt that the dog can neither escape nor breathe.
As one game warden in the Black Forest remarked of a huge den:
“Five good hunting dogs are under there, and the old badger is still alive.”
Digging Is Good for the Environment Earthworms are less noticeable but just as efficient in tunnel construction.
As one of more than 3,000 species worldwide, the nightcrawler, our conventional “earthworm,” is a true master of civil engineering.
It digs vertical burrows in loamy, sandy soil.
The earthworm is a true master of civil engineering.
There can be up to a thousand deep earthworm burrows per square meter of soil.
Some have been measured at up to eight meters long.
This creates an excellent ventilation system that provides plenty of oxygen and nitrogen to the soil.
Earthworms emerge from the ground after dark and pull plant materials into their burrows.
Bacteria and fungi help break down the indigestible plant cell walls so that the worms can absorb the nutrition through their intestinal walls into their blood.
Anything not digested is expelled through the anus and left as a pile of excrement at the burrow ’s entrance.
This is immediately attacked by bacteria, insect larvae and springtails, releasing additional nutrients.
The earthworm is then ready to eat its own excrement in “refined” form.
The same food goes through the worm ’s digestive tract again and again, with new minerals, plant remains and microorganisms each time.
Earthworm excrement becomes a rich mixture of organic and mineral materials that is easily absorbed by plants in this form.
Worm burrows are also an efficient drainage system, because they allow heavy rain to be soaked up as with a sponge.
Soil full of worm holes can take four to ten times the amount of water as soil without worms.
For this reason, this natural drainage system protects cultivated land from surface erosion.
To ensure that the walls of their burrows – which are just a few milli-
Effiicent tunnel builders:
Earthworms are vastly important for plant growth.
meters wide – do n’t collapse, the worms plaster them with excrement.
Once a burrow is worn out from months of its resident ’s comings and goings, the earthworm reshapes the tunnel profile to its body using new layers of excrement.
This is because the worm needs a custom burrow to pull itself up:
It uses circumferential and longitudinal muscles to make sections of its body thick and short or long and thin, moving ahead with each contraction.
Abandoned burrows are immediately seized by plant roots as a convenient way to reach the damp underground; the “wallpaper” made of worm excrement is the best fertilizer for hungry plants.
Earthworms and their biological potpourri in the ground are vastly important for plant growth, as shown by experiments in the Netherlands using new polders intentionally populated with earthworms.
Thanks to the worms’help, the winter wheat crops doubled, and clover increased tenfold versus new fields without earthworms.
Fight for Survival in the Sand The Namib Desert in southwestern Africa is host to a very special kind of civil engineering competition:
the golden wheel spider and a species of spider wasp.
The wheel spider lurks on the mighty sand dunes, where it builds burrows up to 50 centimeters deep in the slope.
No easy task in loose sand.
The spider manages this by lining the tunnel wall with silk as it moves along in the construction process.
To hide from its enemies, it closes the entrance with a “door” made from sand and silk.
It hunts at night for small insects; sometimes it catches a darkling beetle or gecko.
The wheel spider ’s deadly enemy is the pompilid (spider) wasp.
It paralyzes the spiders it catches with its poison stinger.
The spider wasp then lays an egg on the near-corpse, so that the larva has a fresh meal ready and waiting.
Tirelessly, female spider wasps search the dunes for wheel spiders.
Once they find a silk door, they launch a home invasion.
The spider defends itself in the narrow tunnel with its front legs or, if needed, pulls the silk supports from the wall.
If the spider has prevented
Golden wheel spiders in the Namib Desert are very talented civil engineers.
the first attack, the wasp changes tactic and digs a funnel into the slope above the spider ’s burrow.
It digs for hours in the fine sand to reach its target.
For a 15 cm deep crater, it must shift 5 kg of sand from the slope using just its legs – which is 80,000 times its body weight of approximately 60 milligrams.
If the wasp manages to break in, the spider has one last chance.
It dashes past the enemy to the edge of the crater, sprints down the slope and flips onto its side, with its eight legs bent toward the body at
Spider wasps tirelessly search the dunes for wheel spiders.
the third joint:
The spider becomes a wheel.
It cartwheels down the slope, picking up speed.
Biologists have measured up to 44 revolutions per second – that ’s the same as a Ferrari going 300 kilometers per hour.
In ten seconds the wheel spider completes a ten-meter dash and might not use its legs again until it reaches the bottom of the dune 100 meters away.
The wasp has lost the rolling spider because, even though it can fly, it is unable to locate its prey in the desert.
European badgers, earthworms, golden wheel spiders – there are many very talented civil engineers in the animal kingdom.
Their tunnel systems provide a window to fascinating worlds hidden underground.
Herbert Cerutti is an experimental physicist and has received numerous awards for his work as a science writer.
He lives in Maseltrangen in the Canton of St.
Gallen.
Connection to the World
Infrastructure and economic growth influence one another – but how?
It is not enough to spend 2 trillion US dollars on building rail lines, as China has done, but not repairing tunnels, subways and airports, as is the case in New York, is even worse.
By Lars Jensen
2000 — SWEDEN – DENMARK Perfect planning:
It is estimated that the Øresund Bridge between Copenhagen and Malmö has an economic impact of about 8 billion dollars.
2016 — WORLD TRADE HUB Construction of the transportation hub below Ground Zero in New York went over budget by 3 billion dollars.
At the end of January, the governor of New York surprised citizens of the state with the announcement that he intended to invest 100 billion dollars in New York infrastructure.
The economic benefits for the region, promised Andrew Cuomo, would far exceed this amount.
Each dollar spent would provide double or triple the return.
It was time for New York to finally connect to the rest of the world.
The governor wants to build two new tunnels under the Hudson River and renovate La Guardia Airport, adding a high-speed rail connection to Manhattan; he wants to move Penn Station, one of the city ’s two main train stations, a few blocks west and add train lines to Long Island and Upstate New York; he also wants to renovate the Javits Convention Center, add new subway lines and create 100,000 units of affordable housing.
The city will receive flood protection and a new power grid as well.
In the future, there will be no more wires running from rooftops to courtyards.
None of these plans are new – the only thing that is new is that a New York politician spoke out in favor of them.
So what happened?
New York responded to the announcement with complete indifference.
Residents, who view their city as the center of the universe, have grown used to infrastructure that resembles what you would find in a developing country.
Even more depressing are the attempts to carry out new projects.
A subway under Second Avenue has been under construction since 1972 and is decades from opening; the World Trade Hub, a mass transit complex under Ground Zero, overran its budget by 3 billion dollars, and the new Tappan Zee Bridge – one of more than 20 dilapidated bridges in the region – will cost more than 4 billion dollars due to poor planning and corruption.
Given these conditions, does Cuomo ’s plan make any sense?
The True Benefits of Infrastructure Projects New York ’s economy is flourishing, and the city attracts high-tech companies and tourists in droves.
It grows by tens of thousands of people each year.
Even the disastrous consequences of Hurricane Sandy could not halt the city ’s growth.
The situation in New York raises questions of global interest.
What benefits do infrastructure projects really provide to the economy?
Are politicians, bankers and builders right when they say that major investments generate even bigger gains for the general public?
Or would it be better if we simply became accustomed to delayed trains and flights, to nerve-wracking traffic jams and power failures, as New Yorkers have?
If governments were to lower taxes, rather than build highways?
Determining the impact of major projects on the economy is one of the most complex tasks in economics.
Take the example of the Gotthard Base Tunnel.
According to Credit Suisse Research, central and southern Switzerland will benefit from significantly improved accessibility, which will increase annual economic output (see page 26).
Among the winners are large corporations and freight forwarders, which will be able to transport goods through the Alps more easily and at a lower cost.
Tourists and business people will need up to an hour less than previously to travel from Zurich to Milan.
On the other hand, workers who commute short distances and rarely travel will see no direct benefits from the tunnel.
They will have to hope for synergy effects, such as companies that move to Switzerland thanks to the improved infrastructure.
Ultimately, researchers ca n’t provide answers to the similar questions that arise for every major project, whether it ’s an additional runway at Heathrow Airport in London or sewers in Mumbai.
The economic benefits of the respective project can only be vaguely estimated before construction gets under way, and economists dispute them even years after the project has been completed.
To what extent do aircraft noise and falling real estate prices near the airport have a negative impact on the community?
How much money will an Indian city save if public health is improved thanks to better hygiene?
Turning One Dollar into Two According to a rule of thumb developed by the World Bank that is now accepted around the world, every dollar invested in infrastructure generates two dollars in economic performance ‒ with no distinction made between energy, transportation and residential infrastructure.
This number represents a good average.
For example, the operators of the Øresund Bridge between Copenhagen and Malmö, which was planned almost perfectly, calculate that it has economic effects of some
When governments lower taxes, rather than build highways?
Network effect:
The larger a system, the faster the number of passengers grows.
8 billion dollars against a cost of 4 billion dollars.
But every project has its own special challenges and opportunities.
An investor who provides a village in Mauritania with electricity, water and schools will receive a greater return on each dollar invested than someone investing in the expansion of an existing highway in Germany from four lanes to six ‒ because the expected productivity gain in Africa is proportionally higher than it is in Central Europe.
Even virtually identical projects within the same country can have vastly different effects.
According to calculations by the International Transport Forum, the Chinese high-speed rail line between Zhengzhou and Xi’an is a billiondollar money pit due to a lack of passengers.
By contrast, the line from Jinan to Qingdao, which cost about the same amount of money, is not only profitable, but has also resulted in a sustained upswing in both cities.
Chinese railways are a good example of the difficulty in calculating the impact of infrastructure measures on a national economy.
Over the last 15 years, China has invested more than 2 trillion dollars in 10,000 kilometers of high-speed rail lines.
The country has some 40 cities with a population larger than that of Berlin (which has about 3.5 million inhabitants), and the most efficient way for people to travel between these urban centers is by rail.
China ’s economic miracle would not have been possible if the country had emulated the US and relied on cars and airplanes.
According to estimates by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce, gross national product would be at least 10 percent lower if it were not for its high-speed trains.
However, doubts about whether such massive investments make sense have been raised by two economists on China ’s National Development and Reform Commission.
According to Fortune magazine, the two academics ‒ whose names are not known ‒ calculated that China has wasted nearly 7 trillion dollars on “superfluous” infrastructure projects since 2009.
During the global recession, China decided to boost its economy with investments ‒ financed by loans.
The two government researchers calculate that the cost-benefit factor of the investments decreased by half ‒ in part because of the funding costs.
Each dollar invested only generated 1.2 dollars in additional economic performance.
China Invests Abroad Nevertheless, the government will not deviate from its current five-year plan, which calls for it to expand its rail network by 120,000 kilometers by the end of the decade.
Planners are hoping for a so-called network effect:
The larger a system, the faster the number of passengers grows.
The International Transport Forum determined that China will still be underserved in 2020.
The average Japanese citizen travels nearly 70 times as many kilometers by train each year as the average Chinese.
The importance of infrastructure to the regime can be seen in its ambitious investments abroad.
Beijing is paying about 50 billion dollars for the China-Pakistan corridor ‒ a network of railways, roads, airports, canals, ports and power plants that China is financing to gain access to the Indian Ocean.
China is being similarly generous in Africa, where it is building a rail line from Mombasa to Kigali (13.5 billion dollars) and investing in a methane power plant in Rwanda (2 billion dollars) and a pipeline from Nigeria to Algeria (9 billion dollars).
The World Bank estimates that Africa could increase its productivity by 40 percent if infrastructure met at least minimum standards.
China has the financial and technical resources to help.
But is it really good business for the continent if, for example, the Chinese build up telecommunications in dozens of countries ‒ with Chinese money, Chinese technology and Chinese workers?
The most criticized infrastructure project in the world is the 278-kilometer canal that Chinese construction tycoon Wang Jing wants to build, with the support of his government, in Nicaragua.
Due to massive technical problems ‒ mountains, active volcanoes, earthquakes ‒ the project will cost 40 billion dollars.
Nicaragua ’s president, Daniel Ortega, gave Wang Jing the necessary land without attaching any conditions.
The Chinese will be allowed to seize the property of tens of thousands of people, destroy one of the richest nature conservation areas in the world and pocket the profits for the first 50 years of operations.
And yet, the project will probably never generate a profit because it is too expensive and there
13 bridges, two airports, three stadiums, 150,000 apartments and 700 playgrounds.
is stiff competition 500 kilometers to the south:
The Panama Canal will open its expanded channel by mid-year.
It is said that Wang Jing lost 85 percent of his assets when the Chinese stock market crashed, and he has postponed his adventure in Nicaragua.
Visitors to Panama today will find little indication that Teddy Roosevelt sent the US Army to the country in 1904 in order to build the canal against the will of the country ’s people.
The Americans destroyed hundreds of square kilometers of forest, enslaved the Panamanians and annexed the land until Jimmy Carter returned it to Panama in 1977.
More than a century after it opened, the canal is one of the most profitable infrastructure projects of all time.
The Americans had planned to use the canal for military purposes, but they quickly realized how useful the water route would be for global trade.
Panama is now one of the wealthiest countries in the region ‒ a long-term consequence of Roosevelt ’s imperialism.
The history of the canal reveals the most important – and, at the same time, most unpredictable ‒ component of planning infrastructure:
the lifespan of the project.
Adjusted for inflation, the United States spent about 9 billion dollars on the construction.
A century later, the canal generates more than 10 billion dollars in value each year.
In 1904, no economist would have calculated how profitable the canal would be in the 21s t century.
Similarly, the merchants of 14th century Amsterdam had no idea that 600 years later their canals would create one of the world ’s best-functioning cities.
The 21,000 -kilometer Great Wall of China has stood for thousands of years, but the first elevated bridges for Chinese high-speed trains are already starting to crumble after just 15 years.
New York only works because it continues to live off of the ambitious projects from the World War generation.
From 1924 to 1968, legendary urban planner Robert Moses built the entire highway system in metropolitan New York:
13 bridges, two airports, three stadiums, 150,000 apartments and 700 playgrounds, and dozens of swimming pools and subway lines.
Moses was controversial.
His highways enabled the flight of the white middle class and his large housing developments quickly became ghettos.
But New Yorkers have reassessed his work in recent years, because although not all of his projects were successful, Moses wanted to modernize New York ‒ for all of its inhabitants.
This spirit has gone missing in the city.
Economic growth is derived mainly from the boom in the financial industry and related sectors, the bubble on the real estate market and the arrival of the super-rich.
At the same time, the number of homeless has doubled since 2005 to nearly 100,000, the highest figure since the Depression.
Skyscrapers with luxury apartments are sprouting up everywhere, but commuters need ever more time to get to work.
Not to mention the lead in the water pipes in the Bronx and the untreated waste water that overflows into the rivers whenever there is heavy rain.
A report by the World Bank notes that as the functioning of infrastructure worsens, the wealth gap increases.
US cities serve as examples.
Because the government has invested so little in recent decades, neighborhoods that are poorly served have deteriorated even more quickly, followed by crime, drug addiction and poverty.
This is another factor to consider when calculating the benefits of infrastructure:
How high is the price when it is not built?
New York Lives on Its Past Back to New York City, where trains to New Jersey crawl haltingly through the tunnel under the Hudson River, which has been eroded by saltwater (that is, if they do not come to a complete stop due to a short-circuit), and the most important connection between Manhattan and Brooklyn, the L train, will soon be suspended for two years.
Can this city really go on without any ambitious infrastructure projects?
Of course not.
Lars Jensen has lived in New York for 15 years and writes for Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, brand eins, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Spiegel and other publications.
INCOMPLETE — CHINA-PAKISTAN CORRIDOR Beijing is paying 50 billion dollars for the complex connection to the Indian Ocean.
UNDER CONSTRUCTION — METHANE POWER PLAN IN RWANDA China is investing generously in Africa, spending 2 billion dollars on this power plant at Lake Kivu.
2016 — NEW PANAMA CANAL The first Panama Canal is considered one of the most profitable infrastructure projects of all time:
Today, Panama is the wealthiest country in the region.
Last Stop!
The new Gotthard Base Tunnel brings German-speaking Switzerland and Ticino closer together, but we must not forget the wonders in between.
An essay by Thomas Widmer
A marvel of public transportation, the Gotthard Base Tunnel will soon become the normal route from the north to the south, from Uri to Ticino.
In Erstfeld, rail travelers will be whisked into the tunnel and shot back out into the light in Bodio.
Leaving thick fog at the mouth of the tunnel, 20 minutes later they will be greeted by palm trees.
Still, where one journey begins, another ends.
The old train route from the 19th century will gradually fade, along with the myths and legends that surround it.
This includes the legend of the Devil ’s Bridge, the first bridge across the Reuss.
In return for building the bridge for the people of the valley, the devil demanded the soul of the first to cross it.
When the time came, the people sent across a goat.
The devil felt cheated, so he attempted to destroy the bridge with a boulder.
But the attempt failed.
An old woman had carved a cross into the boulder, causing the devil to miss his target.
The 2000-ton Teufelsstein, or Devil ’s Stone, can still be seen at the mouth of the Gotthard Tunnel in Göschenen.
Decades ago, it had to be moved 127 meters because it blocked construction of the highway.
The maneuver had a price tag of 300,000 francs.
Yes, you read that right, the Swiss love their Gotthard.
Along with all of its legends.
Picturesque Peaks The Gotthard Pass connects so much.
Traveling the old line is like sitting in a moving slideshow watching wonder after wonder roll by.
In Amsteg, for example, the view from the train window is a never-ending feast for the eyes as a picturesque road steeply winds up through the Maderaner Valley.
Shortly thereafter is Gurtnellen, protected by rock and snow barriers that look like they were designed by an orthodontist.
The municipality is threatened by 53 avalanche paths, the worst of them on the Geissberg, where an avalanche swept away a family of nine and their farm in 1942.
On the other side of the Reuss Valley, to the east beyond the first mountain ridge, is yet another hidden curiosity:
the Tresch Hut in forgotten Felli Valley.
The hut got its name from Johann Josef Tresch-Indergand, a legendary figure of the 19th century.
The impoverished farmer, mountain guide and crystal hunter lived in a primitive hut in Felli Valley, passing lonely hours playing a barrel organ and carving his own shoes out of wood.
He was the first to reach countless summits.
In 1902, having heard cries for help, he disappeared into the mist forever in an attempt to render aid.
Two decades later his pin and pocket knife were found along with his remains.
The Gotthard is not a gentle landscape.
It ’s a powerful one.
Painter and poet Heinrich Danioth from Altdorf wrote this about the typical resident of Uri:
“In the grip of dark cliffs, he remains devoted and humble.”
Today, of course, luxury has found a home in parts of the valley as well.
Up in Gurtnellen-Dorf, right next to the Church of St. Michael, with its compact tower designed to withstand pressure waves from avalanches, the Im Feld inn offers local culinary delights.
The inn ’s restaurant serves Ryys and Boor, Milchbänzä-Kotlettä with Sywgagglä, and Gschtunggätä Pullis, homey Alpine dishes worthy of Gault-Millau ratings.
And then there ’s the little church of Wassen, which can be seen from three different perspectives as the train tunnel winds through the mountain.
Without this Alpine crossing highlight, a proper childhood hardly seems possible.
Lost in Another Time The tunnel ends as soon as it begins.
And the first village on the other side is Airolo in Ticino, which offers another string of fascinating sights.
The Ritom funicular near Piotta is one of the steepest railways in the world.
Passengers would do well to make the short climb up to Lago di Cadagno, joining researchers from around the world who are regular visitors to the lake.
The small mountain lake is a unique wonder with two separate layers of water separated by a third layer of phototropic sulfur bacteria.
A little farther down the mountain in Rodi is the Tremorgio cable car, which leads up to a lake of the same name, yet another phenomenon of nature.
Because Lake Tremorgio is circular, including the sloping cirque around it, some have theorized that it was created by a meteorite.
The mystery is best studied from the grotto.
The residents of Ticino usually have the place to themselves while non-locals foolishly dash through the lower Leventina.
They also miss out on the fantastic mushroom ravioli at Hotel Baldi in Rodi.
Moving south, it quickly grows dark in the Piottino Ravine.
Tariffs were collected on trade at the upper inlet during the Ancien Régime.
The massive Dazio Grande, the former customs checkpoint, is now a hotel featuring spacious rustic rooms, and it ’s easy to lose oneself in another day and time.
Finally we reach the town of Giornico, shortly after the ravine, where the Church of San Nicola sits a stone ’s throw from the tracks.
The granite church is an impressive and sturdy example of Lombard Romanesque architecture.
And again this feeling of being lost in another time:
Visitors today can close their eyes and easily imagine ragged peasant children passing by outside the church.
An oxcart.
A mercenary soldier with a bloody head bandage limping home from the Battle of Marignano.
The Gotthard has witnessed a great deal; it is a reservoir of history and folklore.
After all, it was the center of the world in the Middle Ages, as the source of much of the continent ’s water.
For proof, one has only to stop in Airolo and take a ride on the Post bus with its view of the Tremola.
That this place has never appeared in a James Bond film has only one plausible explanation:
The serpentine curves are too extreme even for 007.
A short hike on the pass above, the Four Headwaters Trail, leads to the headwaters of the rivers below.
Then glitz and glamour greet visitors in Andermatt where an Egyptian investor has built Switzerland ’s newest five-star hotel.
The Chedi ’s lobby would n’t feel out of place in New York or Tokyo.
With the new NEAT line, we run the risk of missing out on all this.
It would be worthwhile to take the old slow, scenic route through the mountains now and again, to experience fantasy merge with reality like nowhere else in Switzerland.
Thomas Widmer is an editor at the “Tages-Anzeiger” and a hiking columnist.
Three volumes of his writing on over 500 mountain hikes have been published by Echtzeit Verlag; all of them were bestsellers.
A scholar of Islamic studies and an Arabist, he has served on the jury of the Ingeborg Bachmann Prize, one of the most distinguished awards for German literature.
The Gotthard is not a gentle landscape – it ’s a powerful one.
Things Turn Out Differently, Because We Think Architecture, Growth, Density:
The Eternal Pursuit of Size
Comments Service
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
1/2016 075360 E
C REDIT S UISSE
Bulletin
“I believe in horses.
Automobiles are only a passing fad.”
Wilhelm II (1859 – 1941)
Innovation
Bulletin Innovation, 1/2016
Time to Read I really appreciate Credit Suisse Bulletin.
The content is always extremely interesting, and the editing work outstanding.
The most recent issue on the topic of Innovation has just arrived, and I ’m going to take my time enjoying it.
Hansruedi Wittwer, Bern
The Best in Europe I ’ve been subscribing to your magazine for three years.
I am a TV journalist in Germany (ARD) and am very familiar with many similar company magazines in Europe.
I find your magazine to be the most successful and the most worth reading.
Each issue is dedicated to one main topic that is outstandingly researched and explored from various perspectives by your changing team of competent journalists – and you have done it again with the important topic of Innovation.
The articles in your magazine offer perspectives that I have not come across in any other magazine so far.
And I can say that I have learned a lot through reading all the issues published in the last three years.
Manfred Voltmer, Saarbrücken, Germany
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
5/2015
C REDIT S UISSE
Bulletin
The High-Rise Building
Exclusively in this issue:
Credit Suisse 2015 Worry Barometer# CSsoba
Bulletin The High-Rise Building, 5/2015
Beautiful and Informative I would like to congratulate you on your excellent magazine.
It is always wellresearched, informative and beautifully designed.
Thank you so much!
Anton Killias, Zurich
High Standard The quality and content of the articles in Credit Suisse Bulletin are of a very high standard.
They are interesting, varied and enjoyable to read.
In an era where cost-saving is at the top of every company ’s list, the publication of such a product that does not generate directly quantifiable results is not a given.
I truly hope that the oldest banking magazine in the world will continue to grow even older.
Bulletin is one of the reasons that I, as a private client, continue banking with you.
Richard v.
Meiss, Winterthur
Extraordinary I think Bulletin ’s content and design are extraordinary.
Well done!
Karsten Peters, Uster
We welcome all letters from readers.
The editors reserve the right to select and edit the letters.
Write to us at:
Email:
bulletin@abk.ch Address:
Credit Suisse AG, Bulletin Editorial Team, GCPA, CH-8070 Zurich
Follow us!
www.twitter.com/creditsuisse www.facebook.com/creditsuisse www.youtube.com/creditsuisse www.flickr.com/creditsuisse
Subscribe to Credit Suisse Bulletin for free
Write an email with your address to:
abo.bulletin@credit-suisse.com
Archive Back issues of Bulletin are available digitally:
www.credit-suisse.com/bulletin
Publishing details:
published by:
Credit Suisse AG, project management:
Claudia Hager, Urs Schwarz content design, editing:
Ammann, Brunner&amp;Krobath AG (www.abk.ch), design concept, layout, production:
Crafft Kommunikation AG (www.crafft.ch), photo editing:
Studio Andreas Wellnitz, Berlin, translations:
Credit Suisse Language Services, pre-press:
n c ag (www.ncag.ch), printer:
Stämpfli AG, circulation:
181,000
PERFORMANCE neutral Printed Matter
No. 01- 16- 180654 – www.myclimate.org © myclimate – The Climate Protection Partnership Credit Suisse – the accessible bank
Access to our products and services should be as easy as possible for all our clients.
We therefore aim to provide the highest possible level of accessibility for those with vision, hearing or mobility impairments.
credit-suisse.
com/accessibility
Seven Questions about the Gotthard Massif
It is not as high as the Dufourspitze, not as photogenic as the Matterhorn and less glamorous than the Jungfrau – and yet, the Gotthard is the most important mountain in Switzerland.
But is it actually a mountain?
A quiz on the legendary Alpine fortress.
By Simon Brunner and Mikael Krogerus
1 What is the longest road tunnel in the world?
forg) The Lærdal Tunnel, Norway spen) Zhongnanshan Tunnel, China rela) Gotthard Tunnel, Switzerland repr) Arlberg Tunnel, Austria
2 The Gotthard Base Tunnel (GBT) cost around 12 billion Swiss francs to build.
Is that a lot or a little?
It was:
lon) …
about the same amount as the Channel Tunnel ett) …
about 25% less expensive mat) …
about 25% more expensive age) …
twice as expensive
3 What famous literary figure referred to the Gotthard?
hestr) William Tell in “William Tell” by Friedrich von Schiller (1804) rspec) Hans von Stoffeln in “The Black Spider” by Jeremias Gotthelf (1842) gener) Heinrich Lee in “Green Henry” by Gottfried Keller (1854/5 and 1879/ 80) nhabi) Heidi in “Heidi ’s Years of Learning and Travel” from Johanna Spyri ’s classic children ’s book
4 The Gotthard does not have a classic summit like the Matterhorn.
Is it actually a mountain?
aint) The Gotthard is a petrological-tectonic massif.
It is not one single mountain.
hohi) The Gotthard does exist (rising 3210 meters above sea level), otherwise there would be no Gotthard Pass.
If you are coming from the north, you can see the peak on the right side of the Gotthard Hospice.
flee) The Romans named the former mule track over the pass after Saint Godehard von Hildesheim (see page 43).
Strictly speaking, it is only the name of the path sfer) All of the above answers are wrong
6 The claim that the Gotthard is the highest mountain in the world can be traced back to whom?
rawe) Napoleon hetr) Julius Caesar polo) Hannibal enil) Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
7 Are there other Gotthard train tunnels?
tte) Yes, one, through the St. Godehard in Ohio, USA (615 meters) ain) Yes, one, on the Nuremberg (Germany) – Cheb (Czech Republic) line.
It measures 318 meters long.
ast) Both of the above answers are true ppy) No, the only Gotthard tunnel is in Switzerland
Take the quiz for a chance to win a trip through the tunnel
To join the fun The letters from the correct answers reveal the English version of a famous Swiss advertising slogan.
Simply write it in the subject line of an email and send it, along with your address, to the below email address by June 15, 2016:
gottardo.contest@credit-suisse.com
5 × 2:
Trip through the “Gottardino” tunnel (CHF 1,000) Package for two with first-class day ticket for a trip through the tunnel with stop at the Sedrun multi-function stop and return trip.
Date:
August 30, 2016.
1 × Mondaine special edition wristwatch SBB Gottardo 2016 stop2go (CHF 750) Bezel-stamped from the original cab doors of an Ae 6/6 mountain train, with stop-second function.
Batch:
2016 units.
1 × Mondaine special edition wristwatch North South (CHF 260) With the Swiss greetings “Griäzi” and “Buon di” on the wristband, the cantonal coats of arms on the reverse, logo on the back of the watch.
100 × 3 D glasses The Google Cardboard glasses give you a 3 D view of the inside of the tunnel.
Participation is free of charge and does not obligate you to conclude a legal transaction.
Entrants must be aged 18 years or older, and live in Switzerland.
Only one entry per person is allowed.
The winners will be drawn at random and notified in writing or by email.
No corre- spondence associated with the quiz will be stored or archived.
No legal recourse is permitted.
160 years of commitment to Switzerland.
credit-suisse.
com/gottardo 2016
CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
1/2016
“I believe in horses.
Automobiles are only a passing fad.”
Wilhelm II (1859 – 1941)
075360 E
Innovation
Things Turn Out Differently, Because We Think
Big Mistakes/Great Ideas
Contributors to this issue include:
1 Helene Laube Journalist Helene Laube was a founding member of Financial Times Deutschland.
Today she is a correspondent in San Francisco for German, Swiss and American newspapers.
In this issue she tells the story of thousands of new start-ups, the so-called Fintechs, which view themselves as meteorites threatening today ’s financial dinosaurs – the banks.
Page 42
2 Lars Jensen Born in Hamburg, Lars Jensen has lived in New York for almost 15 years and writes for prominent German-language magazines.
Interested in writing a profile, he got in touch with former hacker Kevin Mitnick, a man described by the FBI as capable of starting a nuclear war from a prison cell.
The authorities were probably listening in on their conversation – according to Mitnick.
Page 24
3 Bettina Rutschi An economist and Chartered Financial Analyst, Bettina Rutschi works in the Economic Research unit at Credit Suisse.
She previously held a position in the SECO Promotion Activities Directorate, among others.
In this issue, she takes a look at Switzerland.
How can a small country that lacks raw materials remain innovative?
Page 20
4 Mathias Plüss A prizewinning journalist, Mathias Plüss writes regularly for the publications Annabelle and Das Magazin.
Plüss seeks to answer the critical question of how people come up with good ideas.
What is the secret of people like Darwin and Einstein?
Answer:
Sleep, taking walks and darkness are all helpful.
Page 34
“I believe (1859 – 1941), Germany ’s last emperor and King of Prussia.
It is in horses.
Automobiles are only a passing fad.”
This famous quotation, date unknown, is from Kaiser Wilhelm II often cited as an amusing story of a long-ago monarch who failed to recognize the fact that times were changing.
But Wilhelm was anything but a technophobe.
On the contrary, he was interested in new trends, and he eventually acquired an impressive fleet of cars, a number of them custom-made.
he quotation on the cover reminds us how mysterious and fleeting innovation can be – and that our first reaction to what is new tends to be skepticism or even hostility.
This is true even when we know a great deal about the subject in question – or perhaps particularly then.
There is often a surprisingly fine line between big mistakes and great ideas.
“Radio has no future,” said Lord Kelvin, a mathematician and physicist (1897).
“We do n’t like their sound, and guitar music is on the way out,” wrote a record company about the Beatles, declining to record their music (1962).
“The wall will still be standing in 50 and even in 100 years,” said East Germany ’s longtime leader Erich Honecker in 1989, shortly before the Berlin Wall came down.
And:
“There ’s no chance that the iPhone is going to get any significant market share.
No chance,” said Steve Ballmer, head of Microsoft at the time, in 2007.
If things turn out differently because we think, as the subtitle on the cover of this issue would have it, what can we really say about innovation?
A great deal, as it happens.
In this issue, we describe what researchers have learned about how and where innovation takes place (hint:
in most cases it ’s not in an office); see page 34.
We speak with Soumitra Dutta, the author of two global innovation reports, who issues an annual report card on the innovative capability of countries around the world.
He tells us which countries have done their homework and which have not (page 14).
In a comprehensive report, we also look at how the financial industry is changing because of the so-called Fintech revolution (page 42) and explain why Switzerland has no choice but to continue reinventing itself (page 20).
Finally, you can test yourself (page 38):
How creative are you?
Your editorial team
Cover image:
Photos:
Michael Filonow/Gallery Stock; Liam Norris/Getty Images; Eric Isselée/fotolia.
Close to clients since 1856.
Credit Suisse has been building private banking partnerships for generations, working closely with clients to help them achieve their goals.
Since 160 years.
credit-suisse.
com
Are human workers in danger of being replaced by robots?
Two researchers at MIT think we ’re safe.
Contents
6 Ahead of Curve
Ten innovations that came too soon.
14 “It ’s about creating something unusual” Economist Soumitra Dutta rates innovation around the globe.
20 Hard Work, Dedication, Education How Switzerland can keep its place at the top.
22 Who Invented That?
Schweppes and Velcro:
Inventions that few know are made in Switzerland.
28 “The dawn of the second machine age” Two MIT researchers on the next industrial revolution.
34 Facilitating Inspiration
How do you come up with an idea?
Sleep helps.
Bright light not so much.
38 Am I Creative?
Test your own creativity.
55 Good Ideas Do n’t Come Cheap Better matchmaking for good people and venture capital.
58 Art (istry)
Five modern works and their special importance for art history
24 A Golden Age for Hackers
Criminals become sought-after computer security experts.
YES NO
42 Rethinking Banking
The young guns and the revolution of the financial sector.
50 It ’s About the Jobs
Why everyone in the financial sector is profiting from digitalization.
52 Who, Where, How Much?
Innovative Swiss sectors and where they are on the map.
54 “Diversity and freedom” What ’s better for a company like Roche:
making inventions in-house or buying them on the market?
64 It Does n’t Always Have to Be Digital How SMEs around the world go about their business.
Photography:
BSIP/UIG via Getty Images; Magda Antoniuk; Pipilotti Rist, “Homo Sapiens Sapiens,” 2005,
Architecture, Growth, Density:
The Eternal Pursuit of Size The Art of Doing the Right Thing
Comments Service
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
5/2015 CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
The High-Rise Building
Exclusively in this issue:
Credit Suisse 2015 Worry Barometer# CSsoba
Bulletin “The High-Rise Building,” 5/2015
Since 1895.
The world ’s oldest banking magazine.
4/2015 CREDIT SUISSE
Bulletin
Decisions
With Credit Suisse Youth Barometer 2015# juba15
Bulletin “Decisions,” 4/2015
Subscribe to Credit Suisse Bulletin for free www.credit-suisse.com/bulletin
Relevant and High-Quality I wanted to let you know how much I appreciate Bulletin.
You manage to address important issues catering to a broad range of interests in articles that are simultaneously relevant and high-quality.
Marianne Roth, Rifferswil
Wonderful Overview You ’ve managed to put out a yet another fantastic issue of Bulletin.
We were especially impressed with the article on Mayor Futoshi Toba and Dr. Roland Kunz ’s “If Only I Had...” Wädi and Maria Kuster, Hinteregg
Grade:
Worth Reading I ’d like to offer my hearty congratulations to the editors of Bulletin.
I just finished reading issue 4/2015 coverto-cover, something I actually never do with print media otherwise.
All the articles are worth reading, put together well and presented attractively.
I ’m already looking forward to the next issue …
Bruno Beyeler, Gümligen
We welcome all letters from readers.
The editors reserve the right to select and edit the letters.
Write to us at:
Email:
bulletin@abk.ch Address:
Credit Suisse AG, Bulletin Editorial Team, GCPA, CH-8070 Zurich
Follow us!
www.twitter.com/creditsuisse www.facebook.com/creditsuisse www.youtube.com/creditsuisse www.flickr.com/creditsuisse
Archive Back issues of Bulletin are available digitally:
www.credit-suisse.com/bulletin
Quality to Share I ’ve been a reader of your excellent magazine for years.
I look forward to the new issue of Bulletin every month and want to thank you for the regular mailings.
I almost always pass my copy on to interested friends and business partners.
Till Neuner, Neckargemünd, Germany
Publishing details:
Published by:
Credit Suisse AG, project management:
Claudia Hager, content strategy, articles:
Ammann, Brunner&amp;Krobath AG (www.abk.ch), design concept, layout, production:
Crafft Kommunikation AG (www.crafft.ch), photo editing:
Studio Andreas Wellnitz, Berlin, translations:
Credit Suisse Language Services, pre-press:
n c ag (www.ncag.ch), printer:
Stämpfli AG, circulation:
110,000
PERFORMANCE neutral Printed Matter
No. 01- 16- 988021 – www.myclimate.org © myclimate – The Climate Protection Partnership
Employment and income open up pathways out of poverty and opportunities for the future.
For more than 50 years Swisscontact has been creating ideal conditions for entrepreneurship in structurally-challenged regions.
Thanks to the support from Credit Suisse and by promoting improved access to financial services, Swisscontact boosts involvement in economic life for hundreds of thousands of disadvantaged people.
Swisscontact works in 29 countries implementing over 100 projects in the areas of skills development, SME promotion, financial services, and resource efficiency in order to promote economic stability in developing countries.
Doing the right thing together.
Support people with entrepreneurial spirit.
Swisscontact Swiss Foundation for Technical Cooperation www.swisscontact.org
Ahead of the Curve
Persistence often pays off:
These ten innovations came too early.
Some of them were considered failures before they finally became a success – but not always for their actual inventors.
Compiled by Daniel Ammann
Tires
He is considered “Scotland ’s forgotten inventor.”
Robert William Thomson was just 23 years old when he patented an invention that he called “aerial wheels” in 1845:
the tire.
First, Thomson experimented with inflated intestines that he wrapped around carriage wheels, but because these quickly burst, he started using rubber for the hoses.
The idea was forgotten.
Neither the bicycle nor the car had been invented yet.
With the emergence of the automobile 40 years later, rubber tires became a business worth millions – reinvented by Thomson ’s fellow countryman John Boyd Dunlop.
Video phone
Perhaps the idea came from the popular animated series, “The Jetsons,” in the early 1960s.
The Jetson family, who live in the year 2062, interact every day with Rosie, the robot maid, and own a Visiphone.
After initial experiments in 1964 (photo), the AT&amp;T phone company launched its Picturephone, the first video phone for home use, in 1970.
Development cost 500 million US dollars, but the Picturephone was a flop.
Not until decades later did the PC and internet make video telephony a success – and added the verb “to skype” to the dictionary.
Electric car
Electric bicycles and cars have conquered urban streets in recent years.
However, this supposedly avant-garde invention has much older predecessors.
Back in April 1881, Frenchman Gustave Trouvé rode around Paris on an electric tricycle.
A few months later, Englishmen William Ayrton and John Perry presented the world ’s first electric car (photo).
Most people do n’t know that as automobiles rose to popularity in the 20th century, the electric engine almost prevailed.
But because the batteries could barely store any energy and gasoline was cheaper, manufacturers switched to the fossil fuel.
Snow cannon
He was a ski manufacturer and desperate:
The winter of 1949/50 saw extremely little snowfall in the US.
Wayne Pierce was stuck with his skis.
One frosty day he had a crazy idea.
He hooked up a garden hose with a nozzle to a compressor out in front of his factory.
Then he ran water through the hose at high pressure.
Sure enough, the cloud of mist froze into “snow.”
The snow cannon had been invented.
It took a few decades until the idea caught on.
However, today nine out of ten ski slopes in the US are artificially covered with snow; in Switzerland, it ’s every other piste.
Digital camera
“They were convinced,” Steven Sasson later recalled a bit wistfully, “that no one would want to look at photos on a screen.”
“They” were his bosses at Kodak, the most important photography company in the world at the time.
Sasson invented the digital camera in 1975.
Kodak banned him from publicly discussing it.
The company was not interested in his invention because they feared it would undermine their highly profitable business in film rolls and cameras.
These days around 140 million digital cameras are sold per year – and Kodak had to shutter its film business.
Free bicycles
Fax
Its shrill beeping echoed through offices of the late 1980s and’90s.
It was almost impossible to do anything without a fax (from fac simile, Latin for “make alike”).
Before the rise of the internet and emails, people sent documents and graphics with the fax machine.
Surprisingly, the origins of faxing date clear back to the year 1843.
That was the year that Alexander Bain, a Scottish watchmaker, applied for a patent for a copying telegraph.
It enabled the electrical transmission of blackand-white images.
The first actual fax machine debuted on the market in 1964.
Penicillin
It was fortunate that Alexander Fleming was a bit forgetful in the summer of 1928.
The Scottish microbiologist left his laboratory window open while he was on vacation, which allowed mold spores to infest a bacteria culture.
After his return Fleming discovered that where the mold proliferated, the pathogens had died.
He called the as-yet unknown substance “penicillin,” but did not attempt to use it as a medicinal remedy.
German-English biochemist Ernst Boris Chain picked up Fleming ’s work again in 1939 – and succeeded in isolating the substance as an antibiotic.
Smartphone
No, it was n’t handy:
“Simon” weighed over half a kilo and was 20 centimeters long.
IBM introduced it in the US in 1993.
Although the term was only invented in 1997, “Simon” is now considered to have been the world ’s first smartphone.
It had a touch-sensitive screen and allowed people to manage appointments as well as send fax and email messages.
The device cost 1,099 dollars.
Just 50,000 units were sold.
“Simon” disappeared from the market after only six months.
The world was n’t yet ready for a mobile phone where making phone calls was just a minor feature.
These days more than 1 billion smartphones are sold every year.
Nespresso
If there was ever a prime example of long-term thinking paying off, the Nespresso coffee capsule system is it.
First it had to be championed by a small team against internal skepticism, then it failed in its initial attempts and needed more than 20 years to become a success worth billions.
Swiss food manufacturer Nestlé purchased the initial patent in 1974 and tried it out first in restaurants and then in offices with Nespresso, before finally testing it in private households in the late 1980s.
The rest is business history.
“It ’s about creating something unusual”
Every year, economist Soumitra Dutta publishes a report card on the innovative capacity of countries around the world.
He explains why Switzerland has been at the top of the list for the past five years, how Japan differs from China, how Africa ’s rise should be interpreted and why it ’s a good idea to have children.
Region on the Rise
In recent years, a number of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have moved up considerably in the global rankings:
Mozambique (+ 26 compared with 2013), Malawi (+ 21), Côte d’Ivoire (+ 20), Rwanda (+ 18), Burkina Faso (+ 14), Senegal (+ 12), Gambia (+ 10), Kenya (+ 7).
The region is doing very well relative to other emerging markets; all of the countries mentioned above appear above the trend line.
Interview:
Daniel Ammann, Simon Brunner and Bill Schulz (illustration)
Professor Dutta, how would you define innovation?
The traditional answer goes something like this:
“Innovation is the generation of new products or services that have a market and that people are willing to spend money on.”
But this definition is somewhat limited, in my opinion.
A broader definition describes innovation more as a mindset; a way of looking at the world.
An approach that questions the usual and helps create the unusual.
Your Global Innovation Index (GII) publishes an annual report card on the innovative capability of 141 countries.
How do you measure that capability?
There are several ways to measure innovation, but I think we have made 400
Per-capita GDP, adjusted for purchasing power (log)
Zimbabwe Burundi Malawi Madagascar Niger Mali Togo Mozambique Uganda Guinea Rwanda Ethiopia Nepal
1,600
Senegal Myanmar Kenya Burkina Faso Kyrgyzstan Cameroon Gambia Tajikistan Tanzania Côte Lesotho d’Ivoire Zambia Cambodia Bangladesh Sudan Nigeria Pakistan Yemen
Switzerland
Global Innovation.
Index Score.
(0 – 100).
Moving Up
China, the world ’s most populous country, is considerably above the trend line:
It is more innovative than other countries with a similar per-capita GDP.
China ’s technological/scientific ranking is particularly high (3rd among all countries); it ranks lower for its institutions (91s t).
Number One for Years
Switzerland has ranked at the top for the past five years.
It is strong in technology and science and has a high level of creative output.
In the category of infrastructure, Switzerland lags behind the average top-10 countries.
China
United Kingdom
Malaysia Estonia Czech Republic
Finland Ireland Denmark
Republic of Korea New Zealand Malta Slovenia Portugal Latvia Israel Belgium Spain Italy Japan France
Sweden
Netherlands
United States of America
Germany Iceland Canada Australia Austria Hong Kong (China) Norway
Trend line
Singapore Luxembourg
Republic of Moldova
Vietnam Morocco Armenia Mongolia Peru Tunisia Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina India Sri Lanka Philippines Guyana Albania Dominican Rep. Paraguay Jamaica Azerbaijan Indonesia Guatemala El Salvador Ghana Bolivia Egypt Cape Verde Iran Namibia Honduras Angola Fiji Ecuador Uzbekistan Bhutan Swaziland Algeria Nicaragua Georgia Jordan
Population in millions 1,000 500 100 10
Cyprus
Hungary
Slovakia
Bulgaria Barbados Croatia Lithuania Montenegro Chile Poland Greece Saudi Arabia
Mauritius Costa Rica
Russian Federation
United Arab Emirates
Thailand
Macedonia Belarus Romania Mexico South Africa Turkey Bahrain
Ukraine
Serbia
Colombia
Panama
Seychelles
Uruguay
Lebanon Venezuela Kazakhstan Botswana Argentina Trinidad and Tobago Oman Kuwait
Global Ingenuity
Since 2007, the Global Innovation Index (GII) has ranked the innovative capability of 141 countries, based on 79 indicators in seven categories (see page 18).
“Innovation leaders” are countries with a GII score of over 50.
“Innovation learners” perform at least 10 percent better than countries with a comparable per-capita a GDP.
“Underperformers” do 10 percent worse than countries with a comparable per-capita GDP.
Qatar
Source:
Global Innovation Index (2015)
6,400
13,150 25,900 38,650 51,400 64,150 76,900 89,650 102,400 5 our model very robust over the last eight years.
We record 79 indicators that we pool in five input and two output categories [see table on p.
18].
We therefore measure both the factors that enable innovation and the actual outputs of innovation.
Input and output are equally weighted, which ultimately results in an overall innovation score.
That sounds abstract.
Could you give some specific examples of what innovation means to you?
Product innovations are, of course, the obvious answer.
The steam engine revolutionized the economy and society.
And on a smaller scale, so, too, does a lighter-weight cell phone, a faster car, a more efficient airplane.
But that is only a small part.
A 100-year-old company can reorganize itself dramatically – this is innovation in the organizational form.
There can be innovation in a business model itself, for example, when a product like a computer program is offered as a new service.
There is innovation in creative industries; just look at Peru.
The country has become the center of South American haute cuisine, thanks to a handful of top chefs – or, more specifically, a married couple named Gaston Acurio and Astrid Gutsche.
They not only launched a new restaurant concept, but also revived the national pride of Peruvians [editor ’s note:
see Bulletin No. 2/ 15].
The same could be said of the telenovelas in Latin America or Bollywood in India.
Online blogs have also created a form of creativity that did not exist previously, albeit often without a direct economic goal.
Creativity is not the same as innovation.
Correct!
You need not only creativity, but also the drive to implement it.
Nevertheless, creativity is not weighted enough in the traditional literature on innovation metrics.
Our Innovation Index also has a sub-category called “Online Creativity” in the second output column.
This also allows us to document the creativity of a country ’s citizens, independently from the government or the economy, as in the blogs I mentioned.
The short answer:
Innovation increases productivity and helps create greater wealth and prosperity in a country.
If we might ask a rather mundane question:
Why is innovation important?
The short answer is that innovation increases productivity and helps create greater wealth and prosperity in a country.
That sounds like a fortune-cookie message for economists.
But is it really true?
Yes.
There are essentially three ways for a country to become competitive.
One, it has natural resources, like the oil-rich countries in the Middle East.
Second, it specializes in transforming raw materials into products and services that are in demand.
China is a good example of this.
Third, it innovates, it generates new ideas and successfully launches them on the market.
In this third category, creativity and knowledge drive competitiveness, which is what most European economies excel at.
Innovation is the best way for them to maintain their high level of competitiveness.
Innovation is not only important for the national economy …
…
That ’s right, it also has social significance.
Innovation creates jobs.
This is particularly important nowadays – especially in Europe, where youth unemployment is high.
Traditionally, it was the government and large companies that created new jobs.
But many Western countries simply do n’t
Topping the List
The top-10 lists show the countries that perform particularly well relative to other countries with a similar income level.
Income is measured in terms of per-capita GDP.
The Global Innovation Index score is given in parentheses.
Income:
low lower middle upper middle high
1 Cambodia (30.
35) 2 Kenya (30.
19) 3 Rwanda (30.
09) 4 Mozambique (30.
07) 5 Malawi (29.
71) 6 Burkina Faso (28.
68) 7 Mali (28.
37) 8 Uganda (27.
65) 9 Gambia (27.
49) 10 Tajikistan (27.
46)
1 Moldova, Republic of (40.
53) 2 Vietnam (38.
35) 3 Armenia (37.
31) 4 Ukraine (36.
45) 5 Mongolia (36.
41) 6 Georgia (33.
83) 7 Morocco (33.
19) 8 India (31.
74) 9 Philippines (31.
05) 10 Senegal (30.
95)
1 China (47.
47) 2 Malaysia (45.
98) 3 Hungary (43.
00) 4 Bulgaria (42.
16) 5 Montenegro (41.
23) 6 Mauritius (39.
23) 7 Costa Rica (38.
59) 8 Belarus (38.
23) 9 Romania (38.
20) 10 Thailand (38.
10)
1 Switzerland (68.
30) 2 United Kingdom (62.
42) 3 Sweden (62.
40) 4 Netherlands (61.
58) 5 USA (60.
10) 6 Finland (59.
97) 7 Singapore (59.
36) 8 Ireland (59.
13) 9 Luxembourg (59.
02) 10 Denmark (57.
70) have the money to create jobs because tax revenues have gone down, and companies are under pressure to reduce costs and become more competitive.
What can be done?
The best solution is to make it possible for young people to create their own jobs.
An entrepreneurial spirit and the opportunity to create small companies and help them grow quickly are extremely important and should be supported.
You have lived and worked in many places:
India, Japan, France, the US.
Do you think there are cultural differences when it comes to ingenuity?
Innovation requires a certain kind of mindset, you have to question existing systems and structures and think about whether you could try a different approach.
The biggest difference that I ’ve experienced is the difference in the drive to want to shift these limitations:
Who is “hungry” and who is n’t?
I am most familiar with the United States and Europe because I have lived, studied and worked there, and headed up various university institutions.
Let us guess:
The Americans are hungry and the Europeans are satisfied?
The old cliché.
This is not just a cliché, it is really true.
I do n’t think young Europeans are less smart than their US peers.
But people in the US always want to try something new, emulate role models, take risks, and even – pardon the expression – fall on their faces.
It is very difficult to imitate this culture.
Of course, Europe is no monolithic block, but in many places young people are less willing to take risks.
They are too satisfied.
Life is good there and people are happy with what they have.
Do you see these differences elsewhere?
I love Japan, I began my career there.
But in Japan today, you meet many young people who lack the necessary drive.
People are satisfied with what they have.
Even though Japan ’s economy has been struggling for some years, the quality of life is still very high.
China, on the other hand, has a hunger to move up, gain recognition, wealth.
Perhaps because the country was underdeveloped for so long?
In my country India, there is also this hunger, even if it is a bit less pronounced than in China.
How can we nurture this drive, especially in wealthy countries?
Role models are needed more than anything.
In the US, India and China, there is a generation of entrepreneurs who are emulated by young people.
They want to imitate them and surpass their successes.
Now, after decades, India once again has a government that is openly businessfriendly.
This certainly also helps.
And yet European countries take the top four spots in the innovation ranking.
The countries you are so enthusiastic about are much farther down the list:
The US is ranked 5th, China 29th and India is way down in 81s t place.
There is a major legacy effect.
The legacy and the development work of past generations play an important role.
Wealthy countries, such as Switzerland, the UK and Sweden, did many things right in the past and can build on what they have already achieved.
For other countries, this means that they have to work hard to catch up.
What are the most effective measures to take for a country to move forward?
A country ’s greatest potential is represented in the first two columns:
institutions and human capital.
Countries have to invest in their citizens if they want to achieve something; this should come as no surprise.
The institutional aspect is more interesting.
By that, we mean political, regulatory and economic factors.
Institutions are the heart of a country and determine everything else.
If a country performs poorly in this area, it is at a major disadvantage.
Factors like legal certainty, political and social stability, level of taxation or how efficient public administrative offices are, for example, how fast a person can set up a business or conclude a contract, all affect a country ’s success in innovation.
Switzerland has led the innovation ranking for five years – what makes it better than all the other countries?
Switzerland is impressive because it ranks well in all categories of the Global Innovation Index.
I am fairly familiar with the country, so we do not have to discuss the quality of its institutions.
After all, Switzerland is one of the most stable countries and one that is most trusted.
But I also repeatedly find that its investment in human capital is very high.
Its schools are incredibly good, not only the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) and the International Institute for Management Development (IMD) business school.
It also has a fantastic infrastructure, its trains are on time, more so than in Germany, for example.
Those were the first three input columns.
The next ones look similar.
Some of the most innovative companies in the world are in Switzerland.
Perhaps not as visible and trendy as Facebook and Google, but Switzerland is at the top when it comes to the world of finance, the pharmaceutical and food industries.
I once spoke with the CEO of Nestlé.
He told me that while 98 percent of the company ’s revenue comes from overseas, more than a third of its research and development (R&amp; D) takes place in Switzerland.
He did n’t mention it because of national pride, but rather to illustrate that Switzerland is one of the most interesting countries in the world for R&amp;D.
The country is unbelievably attractive for foreign talent.
In certain areas, the proportion of skilled foreign workers is well over 50 percent.
After so much praise – what do we need to do in order to maintain our position?
It ’s obvious:
If you are number one, you can only consolidate or fall back.
But let me reassure you:
Even if Switzerland were to drop to third or fourth place, it would not be a tragedy.
It ’s not so important what ranking a country achieves; rather, the important thing is to be among the most innovative nations globally.
To put it another way:
What are Switzerland ’s weaknesses?
I still see a great deal of potential in branding the country.
Switzerland is not seen as an innovation champion.
The global Switzerland brand does not focus enough on innovation.
It could and should do more in this area.
Wherever I go, people are surprised that Switzerland is at the top of our rankings list and not the US, as an example, even though the countries have some similar strengths.
What is Switzerland ’s image?
People think that this small country isolates itself and is not very open to immigration.
They are surprised when they hear that there are more skilled foreigners living and working in Switzerland than in almost any other industrialized country.
Also, the Swiss are rather low-key.
They are reserved, do not want to stand out or appear better than they are.
And when they are the best, they do not want to discuss that fact.
But the world has become a noisy place and one has to be heard!
What would you do?
Let me try to explain by way of an anecdote.
Many years ago, I went through passport control in Switzerland.
The border official asked me:
“Are you a software programmer?”
I had to smile.
His question came as no surprise, given the stereotype of India as a high-tech, software-programming country.
So what would you do?
We all know that India does much more than just software programming.
The country has thousands of other things to offer and many other problems.
Yet the outside world sees us as a software nation.
Why?
Nasscom [editor ’s note:
National Association of Software and Services Companies], an organization made up of the major Indian computer corporations, has invested a great deal in positioning the country as an IT stronghold.
In other sectors, too, India has invested heavily in its own brand – in fact, our brand reputation is often better than the reality.
The India Brand Equity Foundation, a semi-public institution that promotes Indian products and services around the world, has made a substantial contribution in this regard.
I remember how, a few years ago, it flooded Zurich ’s Kloten airport with advertising for India when India was the main topic at the World Economic Forum (WEF).
This makes brand India really stand out.
What does all this mean for Switzerland?
This example shows that it is possible to position a country.
All the players have to work as a team:
the government, private entrepreneurs, major global companies.
What is innovation?
The Global Innovation Index records 79 indicators that are divided into seven categories, each with three sub-categories.
Five of those categories are on the input side, two on the output side.
Input and output are weighted equally when calculating the final innovation score, which ranges from 1 to 100.
Input
Output
Institutions
Political environment
Human capital and research
General education
Infrastructure
IT and communication technologies
General infrastructure
Market Economic development level development level Credit Knowledge workers
Technology/science performance
Knowledge creation
Creative achievement
Intangible assets
Regulatory environment
Higher education
Investment
Innovation environment
Knowledge impact
Creative goods and services
Economic environment
Research and development
Environmental sustainability
Trade and competition
Knowledge imports
Knowledge dissemination
Online creativity
It ’s not so important what ranking a country achieves; rather, the important thing is to be among the most innovative nations globally.
That ’s how you create a positive image.
Switzerland is the global center of innovation and should be perceived as such.
From a global perspective, what interesting things are happening in the innovation landscape?
In the current report, we asked precisely this question.
Which countries stand out in their reference group?
If you look at the level of development, the following countries stand out in their respective groups:
Armenia, China, Georgia, India, Jordan, Kenya, Malaysia, Moldova, Mongolia, Uganda and Vietnam.
What is striking is that an above-average number of African countries have improved:
Malawi, Rwanda, Burkina Faso, Kenya, Uganda.
The good news is that Africa is making progress, there is no doubt about that.
But the gap is still considerable.
In some countries, government leaders have improved and there is a certain awareness that innovation is essential if you want to be more competitive.
In many African countries, technology has become a major driver in development, making it possible simply to skip some development steps.
Technology, digitalization, globalization – are they creating equal opportunities when it comes to competitiveness?
Twenty-five years ago, computers, the internet, cell phones and other technologies were luxuries for the wealthy.
Today, these things have become more affordable and more democratic.
Last year, I helped a minister in Colombia address innovation questions.
I was impressed by the fact that they offer courses of study for app programming even in remote areas.
Even from there, you can reach the entire world at very little expense.
Developers can load the app to the App store, and it is immediately available to a global market.
This is good for the people!
But competition is intense, especially in the digital world.
Successfully launching an app requires huge marketing efforts.
That ’s true.
Yet being connected to the world allows people to dream, it provides inspiration and hope.
For a long time, these countries were isolated and there was no incentive to do anything at all.
You mention Colombia as a positive example, yet compared with Africa, South America is doing rather poorly.
Many South American countries are not doing enough.
Some of the reasons are well known:
poor political leadership.
Little focus on innovation.
Look at Brazil.
It had ten wonderful years during which it fully savored its raw materials boom.
But now, with the low prices in the global markets, the country is suffering.
One reason for this is that it did not invest enough in sustainable development when things were going well.
On a final note:
What was the best idea you ever had?
It was having a child.
But you do n’t realize it until after the fact.
But that was the high point.
Was it your idea?
(Laughs) Difficult to say.
But I recommend it to everyone.
Hard Work, Dedication, Education
As a small, Alpine country that lacks raw materials, Switzerland has no choice but to continually reinvent itself.
Having perfected the art of reinvention over the centuries, today it is considered the most innovative country in the world.
But how can it remain innovative?
By Bettina Rutschi
A country without natural resources.
(Pictured:
The EPFL ’s Rolex Learning Center in Lausanne.
)
Well into the 18th century, Switzerland was known primarily for the Alps, cows and sheep.
“O learn to know this shepherd people, boy!”
wrote Friedrich Schiller in his play “William Tell,” referring to Switzerland.
Today, 200 years later, Switzerland is known for its innovative capacity and strong economy.
It tops the major international rankings for innovation.
* Patents are another indicator for measuring innovative success.
Between 1985 and 2014, the number of patent applications worldwide nearly tripled, to just under 2.7 million annually.
Over 43,000 applications were submitted in Switzerland in 2014.
In absolute terms, Switzerland ranks eighth in the world; on a per-capita basis, it is number one (source:
WIPO).
Lacking natural resources, Switzerland has always been forced to innovate and develop other sources of income, such as agriculture, tourism, industry and the service sector.
Given Switzerland ’s small and highly fragmented internal market, early on Swiss companies also had to look for foreign markets for their goods, and they had to be productive enough to compete internationally.
Since the country was largely spared the ravages of the Second World War, it was in an excellent position, with intact, export-oriented production facilities, to benefit from Europe ’s post-war reconstruction.
Also helpful were Switzerland ’s liberal, stability-oriented economic policy and traditionally keen emphasis on hard work, dedication and education.
The Contributions of Foreigners Another factor, finally, has played an important role throughout Swiss history:
immigration.
From the 16th to 18th centuries, there were waves of immigration as Protestant Huguenots from France sought at least temporary refuge in Geneva.
Many of them were wealthy or highly skilled in a trade.
One of their contributions was to bring the manufacture of portable timepieces to Geneva, which was a stroke of luck for the members of Geneva ’s venerable goldsmith trade, whose source of income had been eliminated by Calvin ’s strict ban on jewelry.
The ban did not apply to watches, which were not considered jewelry.
This marked the beginning of the Swiss watch industry.
After Switzerland was established as a liberal, federal state in 1848, political refugees fleeing the absolute monarchies of Europe arrived in Switzerland.
Among them were professors from Germany, who helped to build up the new Swiss universities.
As the pace of industrialization accelerated in the second half of the 19th century, Switzerland ultimately became one of the classic immigration countries, a development driven primarily by the high demand for labor.
Throughout the centuries, Switzerland has also been able to attract highly qualified workers who have played a crucial role in its economic development.
Today, more than 60 percent of annual expenditures on research and development, totaling approximately 18 billion Swiss francs, are financed directly by the private sector.
About a quarter of the funds come from the government, the rest from foreign investors.
Switzerland ranks about average, compared with other countries, for the level of public financing relative to its gross domestic product (GDP).
The driving force behind Switzerland ’s impressive success at achieving innovation is the business sector, particularly large companies.
ABB, Roche, Nestlé and Novartis applied for between 400 and 600 patents each in 2014.
According to data from the European Patent Office, this puts them among the top 50 patent applicants in Europe.
Switzerland ’s small and medium-sized businesses, too, are international leaders in taking advantage of the latest knowledge for their own innovation processes and manufacturing high-quality, specialized products for international niche markets.
In a survey of companies conducted by Credit Suisse in 2014, ten percent of all
ABB, Roche, Nestlé and Novartis are among the top 50 companies in Europe in terms of patent applications.
industrial SMEs reported that they were global market leaders for at least one of their core products.
Thirty percent were market leaders for at least one core product in at least one country.
Starting Point:
Strong Universities Along with private industry, the higher education sector plays an important role in Switzerland ’s innovative capacity – for example, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ) and EPFL in Lausanne.
Those two universities are in the top 20 worldwide.
The central mandate of Switzerland ’s institutes of technology is to promote innovation.
Each year, more than 2,000 graduates of master ’s degree programs and more than 1,000 PhDs leave ETHZ and EPFL to join the private sector.
The two institutes also conduct basic research and partner with the private sector and public agencies to produce successful, market-ready innovations through the transfer of knowledge and technology.
They apply for approximately 200 patents every year, and reported 49 spin-offs in 2014 alone.
What We Need If Switzerland is to maintain its top position internationally, it must ensure that the necessary conditions for innovation remain in place.
These include, for example, business-friendly regulations and a moderate level of domestic taxation, as well as free access to foreign markets.
In addition, it should be made as easy as possible for Swiss companies and Swiss universities to recruit skilled workers from abroad, including from non- EU/EFTA countries.
Finally, Switzerland must ensure that its education system remains strong.
If these basic conditions worsen, it will have a hard time competing in the international marketplace.
One thing is certain:
International competitors, too, are larger and faster than ever before.
* Switzerland tops the WEF ’s Global Competitiveness Report, the EU ’s Innovation Union Scoreboard, the Global Innovation Index compiled by Cornell University, INSEAD and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) – see page 14.
Bettina Rutschi works for Credit Suisse Economic Research.
Who invented that?
Even in the 19th century, Switzerland was a poor country.
To attain prosperity, the Swiss had to become inventive.
Compiled by Daniel Ammann, illustrations by Magda Antoniuk
Everyone ’s heard of the knife developed by cutlery maker Karl Elsener, who founded Victorinox and made the Swiss Army Knife an iconic brand; the fine chocolate bar created by François-Louis Cailler; and a long list of pharmaceuticals, from laudanum (Paracelsus) to Voltaren (Ciba-Geigy) and Sandimmun (Sandoz) to synthetic interferon (Charles Weissmann).
Many Swiss inventions are known around the world.
But many other familiar items likewise have their origins in Switzerland.
Could you have named these six?
1 B Cellophane His first thought was to invent a coating that would protect clothing from liquids.
What resulted, however, was the first packaging film that could come in direct contact with
2 C Soft drinks Coca-Cola arrived on the market in 1886.
But the soft drink was invented 100 years before that, in Switzerland.
In 1780, after ten years of research, Geneva clockmaker Johann Jacob Schweppe invented an industrial method for bottling artificially carbon- ated water.
His beverage was an immediate success; physicians recommended it as a remedy for indigestion and gout.
In 1783, Schweppe founded the company that still bears his name:
Schweppes.
Some years later, he expanded his business to London, where he soon became an official supplier to the royal family.
A B C
4 6 3 5 archy.
He soon came up with a solution.
He finely grated a cone of sugar, moistened the granules, and poured them into a sheet metal form divided into small cubes, which were then pressed and dried.
Rad patented his sugar cube press in 1843.
4 D DDT High-school dropout becomes Nobel Prize winner – that ’s the short version of Paul Hermann Müller ’s story.
Here ’s the longer version:
When Müller was 17 years old, getting bad grades at the Freie Evangelische Volksschule in Basel, he left school.
At first, he worked as a laboratory assistant.
But later he returned to school, graduated, and went on to study chemistry.
In 1939, while working at J.
R.
Geigy AG (now Novartis), he discovered that DDT (dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane) was a powerful insecticide.
In 1948, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this discovery, the first person to receive the prize who was not a physician.
5 A Velcro fastener Georges de Mestral ’s invention was so far ahead of its time that he inspired a science fiction story:
The engineer from Colombier figured in an episode of the television series Star Trek.
In the “Carbon Creek” episode of the show ’s second season, a Vulcan named Mestral brings the hook-and-loop closure to an Earth human in the 1950s.
What a tribute!
Naturally, the reality was a different story.
George de Mestral patented his new fastener system in 1951 under the name Velcro, from the French words “velours” (velvet) and “crochet” (hook).
6 F Pascal A generation of computer scientists learned to program using Pascal, the programming language developed in 1968 by Professor Niklaus Wirth at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich.
He named it in honor of the French mathematician and philosopher Blaise Pascal (1623 – 1662), who had invented one of the first mechanical calculators.
Wirth had encountered his first computer in Canada in 1960:
a mainframe computer the size of a wardrobe.
“It had to be monitored day and night by a technician, and whenever I needed it for a calculation, it seemed to be in the process of being repaired,” Wirth later recounted.
A Golden Age for
(Good and Bad)
Hackers
The FBI once said that Kevin Mitnick could start a nuclear war from his prison cell by whistling into a payphone.
Today, he helps companies protect themselves from hackers.
Mitnick reveals the only secure way to use a computer.
By Lars Jensen
We ’re on the phone with the man who dubs himself the world ’s most famous hacker.
We ’ve reached him at his office in Las Vegas, where he ’s trying to answer a few questions.
“Hello, Mr. Mitnick, can you hear me?”
The connection breaks up.
Mitnick calls back.
“Is this better?”
he asks.
“No, I can barely hear you.
What ’s wrong?”
He does n’t want to give away any details, but he ’s taken security precautions – after all, you never know who might be listening.
“You have to assume that every telephone conversation is being monitored.
We ’ve learned that the NSA stops at nothing,” says the hacker, who once specialized in telephone eavesdropping himself.
He thinks it ’s foolish to make calls on a landline or mobile phone.
“If you want to speak freely, the only way to do it is over an internet connection with end-toend encryption.”
No one can blame Kevin Mitnick for being paranoid about his communication security.
The FBI hunted him across America for three years before finally apprehending him in 1995, and he was sentenced in 1999.
Mitnick served five years in prison – four and a half years pre-trial and eight months in solitary confinement.
“The federal prosecutor was able to convince the judge that I could start a nuclear war from prison by whistling into a payphone,” Mitnick says.
“Of course it was n’t true.
My draconian sentence was supposed to send a message.”
Now, sixteen years after his release, Mitnick runs Mitnick Security – a company that is thriving, he reports, by consulting with large corporations and government authorities on security matters.
Judging by his calendar, he travels almost nonstop, giving presentations and leading training sessions all over the world.
His Facebook page reveals that he enjoys sampling exotic cocktails on his countless trips.
His books are bestsellers, and his hacker career was the basis of a Hollywood film (“Takedown”) as well as numerous documentaries.
Not Just Criminals Anymore
Just a few years ago, most security managers would never have considered inviting in a convicted hacker to secure their computer systems from attack.
But hackers – or “security investigators,” as they prefer to call themselves – are living in a golden age.
They are cashing in as software and hardware manufacturers search for ways to defend against ever bolder attacks.
Merijn Terheggen, CEO of the agency HackerOne, which acts as an intermediary between hackers and
The performance of the chips in our devices doubles every two years.
companies seeking their services, says, “The performance of the chips in our devices doubles every two years.
The complexity of the applications on those devices doubles every few months.
Together, this means that the number of security vulnerabilities is growing exponentially.
No one can contain them anymore.”
His conclusion:
“In 18 to 24 months, all of the world ’s large companies will have programs to harness the creativity of hackers for their own protection.”
Kevin Mitnick is 52 years old – about 35 years older than the typical hacker sitting in front of a screen somewhere in Pakistan or Bolivia, browsing the internet for security vulnerabilities.
Mitnick is enjoying the new era:
“The greatest difference from when I was young is that hackers are n’t inherently seen as criminals anymore.
If these opportunities had existed back then,
I would have had a legal outlet for my curiosity and desire to experiment.”
His career began with harmless pranks when he was 13 or 14 years old.
Later on he broke into the systems of all the large telecommunications companies in the US, eavesdropped on conversations, and stole source codes – a company ’s digital DNA.
He even outwitted the FBI.
Mitnick found the investigators’mobile phone numbers and developed a warning system that alerted him whenever an agent was coming close.
Mitnick kept up this game of cat and mouse across North America for nearly three years.
It helped that nature had provided him with a thoroughly average face.
His glasses, hair, voice – two minutes after meeting him, you ’d be pressed to remember anything about how he looks.
He insists that the authorities mercilessly exaggerated his crimes.
His favorite hack was breaking in to the intercom system at a local McDonald ’s drive-thru.
“A police car drove up, and the officers were about to order.
I hacked into the speaker and yelled, ‘ Get rid of the cocaine!
Get rid of the cocaine!
’ The employees panicked.
The cops just looked confused.”
Mitnick still laughs today when he tells anecdotes from his youth.
Back then, no one could imagine a world where everything is digitally connected – banking, dating, buying and selling weapons.
The film “Hackers” recently celebrated its 20th anniversary, but its romantic image of the hacker has little in common with hackers today.
“What we ’re seeing more and more are small groups and individual criminals who are developing capabilities that were previously accessible only to government institutions,” says Michael V. Hayden, former director of the National Security Agency.
“It ’s obvious what kinds of problems arise from this.”
The Internet as the Next Battleground
In October, the Washington Post reported that a group of Albanian hackers called Kosova Hackers Security (KHS) stole personal data from 100,000 customers, including 1,351 military and other government personnel, in a cyberattack on an American online retailer.
KHS then sold this data to the highest bidder – Islamic State (ISIL).
Junaid Hussain, a British citizen of Pakistani descent who was a member of ISIL, shared the information, including addresses and telephone numbers, on Twitter, threatening that “our soldiers will strike at your necks in your own lands.”
The FBI arrested the KHS leader in Malaysia, and Hussain was killed by a drone strike in Syria.
Kevin Mitnick before his arraignment in Raleigh, North Carolina on February 17, 1995.
A world war is raging online on invisible battlefields.
All systems are under attack at all times.
Every network is constantly being tested.
But the victims only usually notice the attacks when it ’s too late.
The retail giant Target discovered the security breach in its internet-connected heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems only after hackers had stolen data from forty million customers.
Sony and the US Department of Defense, the American subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom and Fiat Chrysler – all have fallen victim to spectacular hacks.
Companies find themselves in a constant state of siege, but they do n’t know where the attacks are coming from or how serious they might be.
The telecommunications group Verizon analyzed 2,122 hacks from the past year and determined that in almost two-thirds of these attacks, the damage occurred within just minutes.
Are the attacks coming from North Korea or the NSA?
From the competition or a coworker?
Or just from a teenager in South Africa?
Technological progress appears to be giving hackers a huge step up.
Have companies, unwilling to give up their internet connections, lost the innovation race from the start?
18 Million Active Hackers
Kevin Mitnick advises his clients to work together with hackers even during software
Technological progress appears to be giving hackers a huge step up.
development, allowing them to look for vulnerabilities throughout the process.
“Many companies, especially in the tech sector, are already doing this,” he says.
He also calls for more digital security training for employees.
Mitnick does n’t think much of the “bug bounty” programs, popular right now, which reward hackers for each bug they find.
“It might work in the majority of cases.
But there ’s a risk that a criminal can blend in with well-intentioned hackers and then sell what he discovers on the black market.”
Eighteen million hackers are active worldwide, according to HackerOne, which links companies with hackers’services.
How can we monitor them?
Even Mitnick operates an exchange on his website for potential “zero-day exploits,” i.
e.
vulnerabilities that have n’t yet been fixed.
But participation in his exchange is by invitation only.
Discovering and selling a security vulnerability is n’t illegal in itself.
Only the people who use the information maliciously can be prosecuted.
The global trade in security vulnerabilities, the so-called “vulnerability economy,” is booming.
On the defensive side of the market, there are agents who purchase system errors in order to offer them to affected companies.
These can be brokers who acquire certain market information and work on the companies’behalf.
Bug bounty programs also fall into this category.
Payment is usually between 500 and 20,000 dollars per hack.
In exceptional cases, Microsoft and Facebook have paid more than 100,000 dollars.
The offensive market primarily involves states and organized crime.
Mitnick says that here the prices for a bug can reach seven figures.
Participants are interested in keeping system errors away from the defensive market as long as possible, so that they can profit from these errors for longer.
Spectacular hacks – involving government authorities, corporations, and schools – are constantly being exposed.
Can Mitnick imagine a system that guarantees total security?
“Of course,” he says.
“You have to hide the really important data behind a so-called air gap.”
In other words, the only way to be 100% secure is to unplug from the internet.
Online Burglary
How can you protect yourself from digital thieves when banking online?
Four secure tips.
Tip 1:
Password
The password is one of the security features of online banking, therefore never write it down.
Use a long combination (at least 8 characters) that cannot be found in a dictionary as well as different kinds of characters (upper- and lower-case letters, special characters and numbers).
Since a strong password like “Ap!
45%_ 0” is difficult to remember, create one from the first letters of each word in a sentence:
“Ronaldo is the greatest.
Go number 7!”
becomes “Ritg.
G# 7!”
Tip 2:
Anti-virus Software
Install an anti-virus program on your computer and keep it up-to-date.
Even new PCs do not usually come with anti-virus software, or they only have a trial version that is valid for a limited time.
Your anti-virus program needs to always be kept up-to-date so that it can detect the latest threats.
Well-known providers offering paid subscriptions include McAfee, Kaspersky and Norton.
A good no-cost option is Avira Free Antivirus.
banking access from being blocked.
Or you might be asked, under false pretenses, to review your contact information.
You then click on a link that brings you to a website that looks deceptively similar to the website of your bank.
After you enter in your login data, you receive an error message, such as “Due to online maintenance, website access is n’t possible at this time.
Please try again later.”
In the meantime, the criminals are logging into your account with the information you just provided.
Never click on links in suspicious emails.
Banks never ask their customers to take any kind of actions via email.
Tip 4:
Malware
Hackers can gain access to login data directly, or through harmful programs known as malware, which include worms, viruses, Trojan horses and rootkits.
This kind of spyware allows your PC to be tracked, for example by logging your keystrokes.
Malware can spread through the internet independently, or it can be downloaded to your PC via email attachments, downloads or data storage devices like CD-ROMs and USB sticks.
So pay close attention to the programs you install on your computer, particularly those downloaded from internet!
Lars Jensen lives in New York and writes for the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Die Zeit, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Spiegel, and other publications.
Tip 3:
Phishing Emails
Phishing is the theft of login data, primarily through fraudulent websites.
One well-known tactic is an urgent email request to log in to your account within seven days to prevent your online
Compiled by Uwe Neumann, analyst with Credit Suisse.
“The Dawn of the Second Machine Age”
Will there be any jobs for human beings in the future?
A conversation with Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, faculty members at the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) who have studied the impact of technology on economies for years.
By Amy Bernstein and Anand Raman
Machines, it seems, can do almost anything human beings can.
What does that mean for business and employment?
Will any jobs be left for people?
Will machines take over not just lowskilled tasks but high-skilled ones too?
If a man and a machine work side by side, which one will make the decisions?
These are some of the questions facing companies, industries and economies as digital technologies transform business.
Technological progress makes the world better but also brings new challenges, say Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, faculty members at the MIT Sloan School of Management, who have studied the impact of technology on economies for years.
Their most recent book, “The Second Machine Age:
Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies,” took an upbeat view of the high-tech future.
Your recent work has focused on the progress that digital technologies have enabled.
But lately you ’ve expressed concern that problems related to them are emerging quickly.
What are you so worried about?
McAfee:
Digital technologies are doing for human brainpower what the steam engine and related technologies did for human muscle power during the Industrial Revolution.
They ’re allowing us to overcome many limitations rapidly and to open up new frontiers with unprecedented speed.
But how exactly it will play out is uncertain.
Just as it took decades to improve the steam engine to the point that it could fuel the Industrial Revolution, it ’s taking time to refine digital technologies.
Computers and robots will keep evolving and will learn to do new things at an amazing pace.
That ’s why we ’re at an inflection point today, at the dawn of what we call the Second Machine Age.
This era will be better for the simple reason that, thanks to digital technologies, we ’ll be able to produce more:
more health care, more education, more entertainment, and more of all the other material goods and services we value.
And we ’ll be able to extend this bounty to more and more people around the world while treading lightly on the planet ’s resources.
Brynjolfsson:
For instance, the first Industrial Revolution created vast wealth but also brought us pollution and disease and the exploitation of child labor.
Digitization is creating new types of economic disruption.
In part, this reflects the fact that as computers get more powerful, companies have less need for some kinds of workers.
Even as it races ahead, technological progress may leave some people – perhaps even a lot – behind.
For other people, however, the outlook is
It ’s not a great time to have only ordinary skills.
bright.
There ’s never been a better time to be a worker with special technological skills or education.
Those people can create and capture value.
However, it ’s not a great time to have only ordinary skills.
Computers and robots are learning many basic skills at an extraordinary pace.
According to the data, productivity is rising, but many Americans’incomes are stagnant or even falling.
What do you make of that?
Brynjolfsson:
Let ’s look at the four key measures of an economy ’s health:
per
Machines are quick learners:
A robot hand developed at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.
capita GDP, labor productivity, the number of jobs and median household income.
For more than three decades after World War II, all four went up steadily and in almost perfect lockstep.
Job growth and wage growth, in other words, kept pace with gains in output and productivity.
American workers not only created more wealth but also captured a proportional share of the gains.
In the 1980s, however, the growth in median income began to sputter.
In the past 15 years it ’s turned negative; once you adjust for inflation, an American household at the 50th percentile of income distribution earns less today than it did in 1998, even after accounting for changes in household size.
Job gains were anemic throughout the 2000s, even when the economy was expanding.
This phenomenon is what we call the Great Decoupling.
The two halves of the cycle of prosperity are no longer married:
Economic abundance, as exemplified by GDP and productivity, has remained on an upward trajectory, but the income and job prospects for typical workers have faltered.
Even though machines did more and more work and the population grew rapidly for almost 200 years, the value of human labor actually rose.
You could see this in the steady increase in the average worker ’s wages.
That fueled the notion that technology helps everyone.
However, that kind of success is not automatic or inevitable.
It depends on the nature of the technology, and on the way individuals, organizations and policies adapt.
We ’re facing a huge challenge.
Is the Great Decoupling happening only in the United States?
Brynjolfsson:
No, similar trends are appearing in most developed countries.
In Sweden, Finland and Germany, for instance, income inequality has grown.
There seems to be a common underlying force that ’s affecting all these countries.
We think that force is technology.
McAfee:
One gauge of workers’prospects is how much of GDP is paid as wages every year.
Labor ’s share of GDP held steady for many decades in America, but since 2000 it has fallen sharply.
Meanwhile, corporate profits were rising quickly before the Great Recession and recovered with remarkable speed afterward; now they ’re at their highest point since World War II.
Workers’prospects are deteriorating in the developing world, too.
Brynjolfsson:
Over the past 30 years, as American companies moved production overseas to lower costs, manufacturing employment in the United States fell.
Our MIT colleague David Autor and his coresearchers David Dorn and Gordon Hanson estimate that competition from China can explain about a quarter of the decline in manufacturing employment in the United States.
But both American and Chinese workers are being made more efficient by automation.
Not all types of jobs are disappearing, are they?
Why are some affected more than others?
McAfee:
Technologies such as payroll-processing and inventory-control software, factory automation, computer-controlled machining centers and scheduling tools have replaced workers on the shop floor and in clerical tasks and rote information processing.
By contrast, big data, analytics and high-speed communications have enhanced the output of people with engineering, creative and design skills and made them more valuable.
The net effect has been to decrease the demand for low-skilled information workers while increasing the demand for highly skilled ones.
Erik Brynjolfsson (left) and Andrew McAfee run the Center for Digital Business at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Cambridge.
Their most recent book is “The Second Machine Age:
Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies”.
The great decoupling
Until the 1980s, the US had largely parallel increases in labor productivity, real gross domestic product per capita, employment growth in the private sector and the median-income of private households.
Productivity and the GDP have continued this upward trend.
Median-income is lagging behind, and job growth fell to its 2000 levels before rebounding recently.
400 in% 300 200 100 0 Labor productivity Real GDP per capita Employment growth in the private sector Median household income 1947 1957 1967 1977 1987 1997 2007 2014 Sources:
US Census Bureau, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Do digital technologies create winner-take-all economies?
Brynjolfsson:
Digital technologies allow you to make copies at almost zero cost.
Each copy is a perfect replica, and each copy can be transmitted almost anywhere on the planet nearly instantaneously.
Those were not characteristics of the First Machine Age, but they are standard for digital goods, and that leads to some unusual outcomes, such as winner-take-most markets.
What would you say to economists who are skeptical about the ability of digital technologies to boost productivity?
McAfee:
We have n’t yet seen what the latest crop of technological breakthroughs can do.
Let ’s keep in mind that products like the iPhone are just eight years old.
ity growth will climb.
In fact, we ’re both confident that digital technologies are going to produce greater prosperity than the engines of the First Machine Age did.
Brynjolfsson:
You could break the Second Machine Age into stages.
In stage II-A, humans teach machines what we know painstakingly, step-by-step.
That ’s how traditional software programming works.
Stage II-B is when machines learn on their own, developing knowledge and skills that we ca n’t even explain.
Machine learning techniques have had some success doing that in areas as diverse as understanding speech, detecting fraud and playing video games.
Is there a third stage?
Brynjolfsson:
Maybe.
It might be when machines understand emotions and
Digital technologies allow you to make copies at almost zero cost.
interpersonal reactions, an area where humans still have the edge.
If you visit the folks at the MIT Media Lab, though, you ’ll find that they ’re working on robots that can pick up on emotions, in some cases analyzing facial expressions better than you and I can.
As the Second Machine Age progresses, will there be any jobs for human beings?
McAfee:
Yes, because humans are still far superior in three skill areas.
One is high- Autonomous cars first drove on American highways five years ago.
And only recently, artificial intelligence systems showed that they could master unfamiliar tasks – such as categorizing images or playing video games – without programmers’teaching them any rules.
All of these are significant advances, but none of them will spread through the economy on its own.
Instead, they ’ll all combine and recombine with each other and with previous generations of technology.
As that happens, productivend creativity that generates things like great new business ideas, scientific breakthroughs, novels that grip you and so on.
Technology will only amplify the abilities of people who are good at these things.
The second category is emotion, interpersonal relations, caring, nurturing, coaching, motivating, leading and so on.
Through millions of years of evolution, we ’ve gotten good at deciphering other people ’s body language …
Brynjolfsson:
…
and signals, and finishing people ’s sentences.
The third is dexterity, mobility.
It ’s unbelievably hard to get a robot to walk across a crowded restaurant, bus a table, take the dishes back into the kitchen, put them in the sink without breaking them, and do it all without terrifying the restaurant ’s patrons.
Sensing and manipulation are hard for robots.
None of those is sacrosanct, though; machines are beginning to make inroads into each of them.
McAfee:
We ’ll continue to see the middle class hollowed out and will see growth at the low and high ends.
Really good executives, entrepreneurs, investors and novelists – they will all reap rewards.
Yo-Yo Ma wo n’t be replaced by a robot anytime soon, but financially, I would n’t want to be the world ’s 100th -best cellist.
How well do you think business is coping with these rapid advances in technology?
Brynjolfsson:
The technologies continue to race ahead, but there has unfortunately been a drop in business dynamism.
This is an opportunity for entrepreneurs to think of ways of using humans in new applications, combining them with technology.
We call that racing with machines as opposed to racing against them.
For some reason, business has n’t been creating new jobs as effectively as in the past.
McAfee:
The best way to respond to change is with flexibility, fluidity – to roll with the punches.
Instead, we ’re seeing this decrease in business dynamism and in labor fluidity.
That ’s a dire trend, and it will keep us from responding properly to the coming technological surge.
Brynjolfsson:
On average, rates of entrepreneurship, despite what we see in Silicon Valley, are going down in the US.
The intellectually easy thing to do is to look at an existing process and say, how can I have a machine do part of that job?
It does take a certain amount of creativity and a the world ’s most talented people come to America to build lives and careers, and there ’s clear evidence that immigrantfounded companies have been great job-creation engines.
The current policies in this area are far too restrictive, and our procedures are nightmarishly bureaucratic.
The fifth thing is basic research.
Companies tend to concentrate on applied research, which means that the government has a role to play in supporting original early-stage research.
Most of today ’s tech marvels, from the internet to the smartphone, have a government program somewhere in their family tree.
Brynjolfsson:
Digital technologies will bring the world into an era of more wealth and abundance and less drudgery and toil.
But there ’s no guarantee that
“The best way to respond to change is with flexibility, fluidity.”
little bit of work to do that, and it does create value.
However, it takes a lot more creativity to say:
How can I have this machine and this human work together to do something never done before and create something that will be more valuable in the marketplace?
What kind of economic environment would make the best use of the new digital technologies?
McAfee:
To create it, we need to focus on five things:
The first is education.
Primary and secondary education systems should be teaching relevant and valuable skills, which means things computers are not good at.
These include creativity, interpersonal skills and problem solving.
The second is infrastructure.
Worldclass roads, airports and networks are investments in the future and the foundations of growth.
Third, we need more entrepreneurship.
Young businesses, especially fast-growing ones, are a prime source of new jobs.
But most industries and regions are seeing fewer new companies than they did three decades ago.
A fourth focus is immigration.
Many of everyone will share in the bounty.
The outcome will be determined not by technologies but by the choices we make as individuals, organizations and societies.
It wo n’t lift us into Utopia or carry us into an unwanted future.
The power to do that rests with us human beings.
Technologies are merely our tools.
Amy Bernstein is the editor of Harvard Business Review.
Anand Raman is an editor at large at Harvard Business Review.
© Harvard Business Review, 2015
Our Commitment to Lower Youth Unemployment.
Through the initiative to tackle youth unemployment, Credit Suisse has been committed to improving the opportunities for career starters in Switzerland since 2010.
More than 8,800 young adults have already received assistance from our partner organizations and from the bank.
Since April 1, 2015, these services have been supported by the legally autonomous “Check Your Chance” association and managed sustainably by the partner organizations.
credit-suisse.
com/youthunemployment
Facilitating
Inspiration
How do you come up with an idea?
There ’s no single recipe to follow.
But creativity needs freedom to blossom – and it ’s hard work.
By Mathias Plüss
An old text on alchemy offers two suggestions for finding the philosopher ’s stone:
“It can only be found by one who is consumed with its quest.”
And:
“You labor in your search and find nothing – search not, and you will find.”
The contradiction between the two reveals a deeper truth.
Often, we can only find what we we ’re looking for after we stop looking.
The sleep that eludes us.
True love that cannot be sought, only found.
And also the inspiration that vanishes under pressure.
Ideas are difficult to corral, like herding cats.
And, like cats, they never come when we want them to.
The great zoologist Konrad Lorenz noticed that birdsongs are the most beautiful when they serve no particular purpose, while a blackbird ’s song becomes a harsh monotone when it wants to chase away an intruder or attract a mate.
“It always amazed me,” Lorenz wrote, “that the songbird reaches its artistic peak in exactly the same biological situation and mood as the human.
That is, when it achieves a kind of spiritual equilibrium and distances itself from the seriousness of life, so that it sings in a purely playful way.”
Failing the Stress Test It ’s a common fallacy that necessity is the mother of invention.
Art is the product of surplus, and even scientific research achieves its most useful results when it is not compelled to be practical at all costs.
New discoveries cannot be planned, otherwise they would n’t be new.
It is counterproductive to demand creativity at the push of a button.
“Many people think that they come up with their best ideas under stress,” says the German psychologist Ernst Pöppel.
“But studies usually show the opposite.
Stress and the pressure of deadlines seem to put the brain in a state of anxiety that hinders, or even blocks, free thinking.”
One study, the colorfully titled “Creativity under the Gun,” shows how employees thought they were more creative under pressure – but in reality, their creativity dropped by 45 percent on the most stressful days.
Of course, some things do work better under pressure.
Anxiety narrows your focus and sharpens concentration, which is good for thinking logically.
But new ideas do n’t come from logic.
Inspiration requires a clear head, and thoughts have to flow, so that you can connect the most disparate associations.
Interestingly, this type of thinking works best in the dark, as the night lets the mind roam free.
Analytical work, however, needs bright light.
Creative Chaos Analytic and creative thinking each correspond to different brain activity.
Researchers have discovered that the brain experiences regular, short phases where the neurons are firing in areas of the brain in identical rhythm.
But the pendulum swings to periods of chaos.
We believe that the brain takes care of routine tasks in the orderly phase, while it tests out new strategies and builds new connections in the chaotic one.
The American psychologist William James (1842 – 1910) described what he believed to be “the highest order of minds” as a “seething caldron of ideas, where everything is fizzling and bobbing about in a state of bewildering activity, where partnerships can be joined or loosened in an instant.”
Not coincidentally, this description is reminiscent of a dream.
Numerous scholars and artists report how important ideas have come to them after a visit from the sandman.
Thanks to creative dreams, we not only have the electric clock and the periodic table, but also Richard Wagner ’s E-flat major chord at the beginning of “Das Rheingold,” and Paul McCartney ’s melody for “Yesterday.”
The American golfer Jack Nicklaus has even said that he dreamed up
Necessity is not the mother of invention:
zoologist Konrad Lorenz (1903 – 1989); American psychologist William James (1842 – 1910), photographed around 1890.
a new swing in 1964, which brought him back to the top of his game.
This might sound like child ’s play, but productive dreams are the result of hard work.
Scientists may come up with the solution to a problem in a dream, but they likely have been pondering the problem for years.
In order for something new to arise, the unconsciousness has to have space to roam.
Inspiration often comes only after you ’ve stepped away from the problem, whether by going on vacation or going to sleep.
Calm and Creative Relaxation is helpful here, as is anything that takes your mind off the problem.
You need to be calm to be creative.
Studies show that people perform 50 percent better on a creativity test after a four-day backpacking trip, for example.
And we are significantly more creative with a blood alcohol level of 0.75 compared to being stone cold sober.
Simply put, creativity is about getting away from focused, logical thinking.
One proven method of distraction is to take a walk.
“Most of what I later put to paper came to me on walks or in bed,” writes the German author Sibylle Lewitscharoff.
“Never while sitting, and certainly not at my desk.
Once I get to my desk, I can only refine and give final shape to what I ’ve already thought, snatched from my mind ’s flight, and relate it in a more or less logical order.”
Solitary walks let your thoughts flow freely.
“Given enough time, your mind will often stumble across some old connection that it had long overlooked,” writes American science journalist Steven Johnson in his book “Where Good Ideas Come From:
The Natural History of Innovation” (Penguin, 2010).
“And you experience that delightful moment of private serendipity:
Why did n’t I think of that before?”
The “stumbling” that Johnson describes is an unmistakable sign of serendipity.
Serendipity refers to the not uncommon phenomenon when you encounter things that you had n’t been looking for, so long as you are open and receptive to it.
The prototypical example is Columbus, who found America while trying to discover a new sea route to India.
The history of science is full of serendipity, especially in the pharmaceutical industry.
Viagra, for example, began as a heart medication.
Researchers learned that the drug had an altogether different effect only after male study participants did n’t want to give back their leftover pills.
Artificial sweeteners, too, were unplanned.
Cyclamate was supposed to reduce fever, saccharine was to be a preservative, and aspartame was intended to treat ulcers.
Chemists only discovered their sweetness because they licked their fingers in the laboratory.
The situation with psychiatric medication is particularly dramatic.
All three major types (antipsychotics, antidepressants and anti-anxiety medications) came about by chance.
We have to thank the attentive doctors who recognized the drugs’psychological effects.
With modern methods of drug discovery, they “probably never would have been found,” as pharmacologist Christian Fibiger writes.
This raises the worrying question as to the value of these logic-based methods – particularly as it has
Thoughts flow freely on walks:
writer Sibylle Lewitscharoff.
been more than 40 years since a really innovative psychiatric medication has come onto the market.
Darwin or the Amateur ’s Advantage “All inventions are a matter of coincidence,” wrote the German aphorist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg, “otherwise rational people could simply sit down and make inventions, just like they write letters.”
Strictly speaking, that ’s correct.
Nevertheless, you can give inspiration a helping hand.
It ’s helpful to exchange ideas with a diverse group of people.
Big cities, coffee houses and interdisciplinary teams are ideal incubators of creativity.
“All decisive advances in the history of science can be described in terms of the cross-pollination of ideas between different disciplines,” said the writer and creativity researcher Arthur Koestler.
This cross-pollination can also take place within the mind of an individual.
It ’s striking that many of the most innovative scientists had a variety of hobbies.
The mind focuses on a succession of different topics, they can enrich one another.
Take Francis Crick, one of the decoders of DNA – he came up with the idea of replicating DNA while he was thinking about how plaster casts are used to copy sculptures.
Or Charles Darwin.
He was n’t a biologist.
He was a theologian and a failed medical student, an enthusiastic pigeon breeder and insect collector, who also experimented with earthworms and dabbled in geology.
But it is precisely these amateur qualities that predestined Darwin to create the theory of evolution, while the leading biologists of his time could n’t see the forest for the trees.
It ’s good not to be too familiar with a particular field ’s conventions and proscriptions.
Consequently, many scientific breakthroughs come from outsiders and nontraditional thinkers, who approach their subject without prejudice.
Consider Albert Einstein, perhaps the most creative scientist of the 20th century.
His most productive phase occurred between 1902 and 1909, when he was working as a patent officer in Bern, and researching only in his spare time.
He did n’t draw intellectual inspiration from colleagues in his field, but instead from a colorful circle of two or three friends, none of whom where physicists.
They gathered almost every evening over sausages and cheese, read books and
The night lets the mind roam free.
Analytical work, however, needs bright light.
philosophized about God and the world, and had a grand old time.
Later as a professor, Einstein never could recapture the productivity of his time in Bern.
His mundane job at the patent office freed him from having to produce “scientific papers in impressive quantity,” as Einstein later wrote.
He cast bitter judgment on the universities:
“It is, in fact, nothing short of a miracle that the modern methods of instruction have not yet entirely strangled the holy curiosity of inquiry; for this delicate little plant, aside from stimulation, stands mainly in need of freedom [...] I believe that it would be possible to rob even a healthy beast of prey of its voraciousness, if it were possible, with the aid of a whip, to force the beast to devour continuously, even when not hungry.”
State of Creativity Since Einstein ’s time, the pressure on scholars to publish, and the obligation to justify their work, has increased dramatically.
Nevertheless, universities still seem to be the best place for scholars to pursue their thirst for discovery, free of existential concerns.
The economist Mariana Mazzucato recently demonstrated that the most important technological achievements of the last decades came from state research laboratories, including the technologies underpinning Apple products.
Steven Johnson shows in his book that two-thirds of the most important discoveries and inventions of the last two hundred years did not have a commercial motive.
These include useful innovations such as the rechargeable battery, the nuclear reactor, GPS, the suspension bridge, the computer and the internet.
The numbers suggest that most companies are not prepared to give their researchers sufficient freedom to create something truly great.
But there are exceptions.
Google has long allowed its employees to dedicate 20 percent of their working hours to their own pet projects.
Although not all employees have seized this opportunity, the program is nevertheless highly successful.
More than half of all new projects at the company came about this way – including Gmail, Google News and Adsense, a service for targeted online advertising.
The only question that remains is why other companies are n’t copying this simple, yet innovative model.
Mathias Plüss is a freelance science journalist.
Am I Creative?
Defining creativity may be difficult, but it ’s even tougher to measure it.
Nevertheless, a number of renowned psychologists have worked to develop their own creativity tests.
Here are the five most interesting.
By Mikael Krogerus and Roman Tschäppeler
1.
Alternative Uses Test
Psychologist Joy Paul Guilford surprised his colleagues in the American Psychological Association in 1950 with this bold hypothesis:
People do not need to have a high IQ to be original.
Guilford defines originality as “divergent” thinking.
Therefore, it is not about doing everything right, but rather about – in his words – “recognizing unusual possibilities when using certain objects.”
According to Guilford, that is creative.
Seventeen years later, he unveiled a test that he believed could measure creativity.
The Task Take this test with at least three people.
Name as many alternative possibilities in two minutes for using:
a bedsheet a brick
The Solution Four different aspects are evaluated here:
1.
Originality:
Award 1 point for answers that another person also gave.
2 points for answers that only you gave.
2.
Fluency:
Whoever found the most possibilities for using the item receives 4 points, the second 3 points, etc. 3.
Flexibility:
How many different types of answers were generated?
Count the “categories.”
(Brick as a “weapon” and “device for self-defense” is the same category.
) Whoever found the most possibilities for using the item receives 4 points, the second 3 points, etc. 4.
Elaboration:
How detailed are the answers?
(“A doorstop”= 0 points, “a doorstop to prevent a door slamming shut in a strong wind”= 2 points).
Now add up all the points:
Whoever has the most points is the most creative.
2.
Torrance Test of Creative Thinking
(TTCT)
Building on Guilford ’s creativity criteria, Ellis Paul Torrance developed the most well-known and likely the only scientifically recognized creativity test.
The Task Complete the figures to create your own drawing.
The Solution The drawings are evaluated by experts in the actual test.
Anyone who wants to make it simpler can observe the images and ask themselves:
How original (not:
how artistic) are the drawings?
The test was never able to definitively answer whether being creative and intelligent are two different animals.
And yet we read about astonishing findings time and again.
In his book “Outliers,” (2010), American author Malcolm Gladwell wrote about a study done at a middle school in England where an average student scored significantly higher on this test than the student with the highest IQ.
Your attempt
3.
The Remote Associates Test
The Task:
Which word creates a new word when combined with each of these words?
The Solution:
honey-dew/-comb /-bee
1 cottage
2 cream
3 night
4 cracker
5 sleeping
6 light
7 sandwich/Swiss/cake /-skate/ water/wrist/stop/fighter/drill/bean/trash/birthday/candle/house/golf
1) cheese, 2) ice, 3) watch, 4) fire, 5) bag, 6) light, 7) club
4.
Solution Testing
Incorrect
Many researchers define creativity as the ability to find solutions for seemingly unsolvable problems.
The nine-dot puzzle is a classic.
The Task Connect all nine dots with a maximum of four straight lines without taking the pencil off the page.
The Solution The trick lies in extending the lines beyond the square.
Managers like to use this type of test as an example of thinking outside the box.
However, caution should be exercised as research with the Restricted Environmental Stimulation Technique (REST) has shown.
With this method, people stay in closed, darkened rooms with no outside stimulation.
The researchers determined that test subjects became quieter, their moods lightened and they became more creative in solving problems.
In short:
“If you want to think outside the box, it ’s better to be thinking inside a box.”
Your attempt
5.
Niklas Luhmann ’s Creativity Test
The mastermind of systems theory gave his students the following two-part self-test in a lecture in which he succeeded in nothing less than debunking the entire creativity business:
“In the first phase, you must follow a simple behavioral rule:
You must open your mind and go into the room next door.
If you determine that your neighbor is reading books that you have not read yourself and you develop a guilty conscience, then you are not creative.
You want to imitate him.
By contrast, if you determine that your neighbor is reading the same books as you and you develop a guilty conscience, then you are probably creative.
Because then you are searching for new paths, possibly unconsciously.
However, the following rules apply in the second phase:
Anyone who uses a creativity test is already not creative because they have shown that they are interested in being creative.
And after all, everyone wants that.”
Mikael Krogerus and Roman Tschäppeler are science writers.
Their most recent work, “The Test Book,” is a compendium of the world ’s most useful tests.
(Profile Books).
Rethinking Bank
Thousands of new business models are sprouting up in the finance industry; investors are betting billions on the Fintech scene.
While it may be surprising at first glance, traditional banks are among those profiting from this transformation.
An industry report by Helene Laube.
Digital revolutionary:
Mike Cagney, founder of SoFi, an online financial services provider.
ing
Mike Cagney often invites groups of carefully selected customers to his home in San Francisco.
Fine wines are enjoyed, gourmet pizza proffered.
But Cagney is not hosting a culinary event; his focus is on conversation with his customers.
His online financial services company, Social Finance (SoFi), cultivates an especially intense style of customer relationship, hosting more than a hundred such gatherings each year.
These events are supposed to move millennials to completely rethink their banking relationships and become lifelong SoFi customers.
It may be surprising to learn that digital revolutionaries rely on (analog) relationship management.
But the personal note and the services they provide clearly pay off.
Cagney and three other graduates of the elite Stanford Business School started the company in 2011 as a small niche provider in Silicon Valley while they were still at Stanford.
Today, according to its own information, it counts more than 85,000 “members,” as its customers are known, it has lent more than 7 billion dollars, and its investors estimated its value at around 4 billion dollars at the latest round of financing.
Martial Rhetoric Initially SoFi refinanced huge student loans at good terms for graduates of top American universities.
The SoFi platform connects participants directly, enabling debtors to connect with prosperous alumni who offer them better terms for student loans than the banks do.
SoFi now also offers personal loans and mortgages, and institutional investors’funds are supplementing those of private investors.
Next up, the company, which is just a stone ’s throw from the Golden Gate Bridge, has its eye on checking accounts, insurance services, and asset management.
For the long term, Cagney wants nothing less than to see his “non-bank bank,” as he puts it, replace traditional banks.
“We ’re trying to make these guys dinosaurs,” he says, with equal parts confidence and media savvy, “and I hope to be the meteor that does them in.”
None of which, by the way, prevented SoFi from entering into a cooperation arrangement with Credit Suisse so that it can finance those mortgages.
Despite the martial rhetoric, the emerging companies increasingly view traditional banks as partners.
More on that below.
What Exactly Do Fintechs Do?
With Cagney ’s high-flying plans and catchy announcements, SoFi is attracting a lot of attention.
But this company is just one of many with similar intentions.
Around the globe, thousands of Fintech companies have set about breaking apart the banks’integrated value-creation chain and rethinking and rearranging the individual parts.
In the process, they have elbowed out a few intermediaries, as SoFi has
Gold Rush Fever
Worldwide, more than USD 12 billion was invested in Fintech companies in 2014, three times more than the previous year.
Subsequent rounds of financing Initial financing round Deal volumes Investments in billions of USD 14,000 10,500 7,000 3,500 Deal volume 800 675 550 425 0 300 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source:
Accenture and CB Insights done, where debtors and creditors organize themselves.
Fintech ’s goal is to disrupt the financial industry and to secure a part of that market for itself.
The tools:
new digital technologies, algorithms and data sciences; new business models; simpler, more efficient and more cost-effective services; and financial services tailored to the needs of the new generation of customers equipped with mobile phones and tablets.
The tools:
new digital technologies, algorithms and data.
Many Fintech startups are plowing the same field.
Almost half offer solutions for payments.
That ’s where banks have the greatest transaction volumes to lose.
“Due to the numerous new providers, the shift in payments is well under way, particularly in the UK and the US,” according to Julian Skan, Managing Director of Financial Ser- vices at Accenture, a consulting firm.
“A lot of value from payments has slipped away from retail banking, and it wo n’t be coming back to the banking sector.”
Credit Suisse works with Accenture, for instance, at the Fintech Innovation Lab, a mentoring program for young business people.
Urs Rohner, Chairman of the Board of Directors of Credit Suisse, sees opportunities for traditional banks in the rise of Fintech.
“Innovative disruption, in the finance industry as elsewhere, makes existing services available to a much broader group of consumers, whether because of price or improved user friendliness.
And they are often combined.”
Major Fragmentation More and more companies and customers, especially younger ones, no longer head to a retail bank first.
Instead they use options provided by individual product specialists.
Anyone who pays or receives money over the internet or on a mobile phone, anyone who needs a payment system for their online or brick-and-mortar shop – they use services with names like Venmo, Klarna, Square or Stripe.
When you want to send
Jack Dorsey, co-founder of the short message service Twitter, took his FinTech company, Square, public on November 19, 2015.
funds in a different currency, you turn to TransferWise, Azimo or WorldRemit.
Nutmeg or eToro manages your assets, Betterment or Wealthfront manages your personal finances, and stocks are traded – free of charge – with Robinhood.
Looking for a personal loan?
Go to Borro, Zopa or Ox.
Business loans can be financed online at
“Make services available to a much wider group of users,” Urs Rohner, Chairman of the Board of Credit Suisse.
Fintech in a Nutshell
Finance startups can be divided into four segments.
There are countless small and larger new companies in each segment.
Here is a selection:
Stripe (San Francisco) – Stripe enables individuals and companies to accept payments over the internet.
The startup supplies the entire infrastructure that individuals and businesses need to set up online payment systems for credit and debit cards.
as a means of payment and individuals to manage their Bitcoins.
Coinbase (San Francisco) – Coinbase is a Bitcoin* administrator and operates the first governmentlicensed Bitcoin exchange in the US.
Payment Transactions
Klarna (Stockholm) – Klarna offers invoice-based payment solutions for operators of online stores in 18 countries.
People in Germany can also open fixed-term deposit accounts with attractive interest rates.
Powa Technologies (London) – Powa sells point-of-sale systems to retailers, a Cloudbased e-commerce platform and an app for smartphones that customers can use to quickly pay with their mobile phones.
Square (San Francisco) – The second startup of Jack Dorsey, who also founded Twitter.
Square started with a credit card reader that attaches to mobile phones and a payment solution consisting of tablets and smartphones for online and offline stores.
Now Square offers services to companies including payroll accounting software, advances on expected receipts (“merchant cash advance”) and food delivery services via Caviar, a startup Square acquired.
Lending
Avant (Chicago) – Avant makes private loans, primarily to people with lower credit ratings.
With its web apps, algorithms, and machine learning, Avant offers loans at rates lower than those of traditional banks.
Funding Circle (London) – Funding Circle provides loans to small businesses through its platform.
Creditors can be individuals or institutions with large assets and government offices, but not banks – what is known as peer-to-peer lending.
Prosper Marketplace (San Francisco) – Prosper is another peer-to-peer lending platform.
It brings borrowers and lenders together.
Wealth Management
Nutmeg (London) – Nutmeg manages investment portfolios.
Mainly younger customers set their savings goals and strategies online, and then this startup does the rest, for a fee of no more than one percent (per annum) of the capital invested.
Vaamo (Frankfurt) – At Vaamo, investors independently invest their money through the website, where they determine their own savings goal and willingness to accept risk.
Wealthfront (Palo Alto, California) – Wealthfront is an automated investment service, also known as a robo-advisor.
The company specializes in long-term financial investments and offers low fees and simple, modern online access.
Digital Currency
Bitpay (Atlanta, USA) – Provider of Bitcoin* payment services that enable companies to accept Bitcoin
Xapo (Zug) – Xapo is one of the biggest Bitcoin* administrators; it transferred its headquarters to Switzerland in 2015.
Xapo stores Bitcoins on its servers, which are located at Swiss storage sites (see the January 2015 Bulletin).
* Bitcoin is not itself a company but rather a decentralized payment system available worldwide, and the name of a digital monetary unit.
lending market places like SoFi or Funding Circle.
(See the box on p.
45 for Fintech ’s lines of activity.
) Each new product and each new service must offer some advantage over traditional options.
One advantage is that they generally are integrated into a longer consumer chain.
One example is Uber, the California mobile ride request company based in San Francisco, also a Fintech company.
With one click, everything is taken care of:
request, ride, pay, get a receipt.
In spite of the ease that these individual services offer, there is one undeniable disadvantage.
Where in the past a person had one bank that was responsible for all money matters, the Fintechs expect an individual to be willing to use untold numbers of different services and products.
That does n’t appear to bother a lot of people and companies, especially younger ones.
They are used to fragmentation on their smart phones, where even the smallest need is covered by a separate app.
Investments Tripled Investors at least are firmly convinced that Fintech companies, with much ambition and few constraints, will change the industry.
Gold rush fever prevails.
According to Accenture, worldwide investment in Fintech more than tripled in 2014 alone, reaching more than 12 billion dollars.
It ’s no wonder that Fintech has developed into one of the most active investment fields for risk capital lenders.
Goldman Sachs estimates that startups could challenge established financial services providers to the tune of up to 4.7 trillion dollars in sales and profits of 470 billion dollars annually.
A company that captures a market share of less than one percent could still claim a handsome business.
So that ’s why investors are putting billions into thousands of companies whose valuation on paper skyrockets, in the hopes that one or the other candidate proves to be a jackpot.
In 2010, 220 venture capitalist companies invested in Fintech startups.
By 2015, CB Insights, a market research company, had almost 900 active investors.
Top venture capital companies, like Sequoia Capital, Union Square Ventures, Index Ventures, Greylock and Benchmark, are concentrating on the following areas:
offers relating to payments, financial bookkeeping for individuals, lending and digital currency like Bitcoin and its centerpiece, the blockchain.
All transactions are registered in a
The Forerunners
Financial innovations have been promoting exchange, trade and prosperity for centuries.
3000 BCE 8th /7th C.
, BCE 4th C.
, BCE 7th century
Lending/Interest
Around 3000 BCE, farmers in Mesopotamia (today ’s Iraq) lent seed for planting.
After harvest, they received more seeds in return.
This was the start of lending and interest, which promotes economic activity.
Coins
Before there was money, people had to rely on barter.
Starting in the 8th century BCE, the first coins made of precious metal appeared in Lydia (today ’s Turkey).
It was the beginning of a revolution.
Now people could save money, buy something with it, or use it to express value.
Forward Transactions
Derivative financial instruments are not a modern invention.
For instance, in his “Politics,” Aristotle describes how Thales, a philosopher, used olive trades on a forward basis to get rich back in the 4th century BCE.
Bank Notes
Starting in the 7th century, the Chinese stored their heavy metal coins with merchants.
In return, they received paper receipts that they could use as means of payment.
The government took up the idea.
Money in the form of bank notes is now very easy to transport and store.
Photos:
Avalon_ Studio/iStock Photo; The Trustees of the British Museum/bpk; MidoSemSem/shutterstock; global database, which facilitates infallible exchange of values, not just the bitcoins themselves.
The Procedure All of these emerging companies pursue similar strategies.
They concentrate initially, like SoFi, on parts of banks’value creation chains.
When they ’ve had a certain success, they quickly expand their offering to include entire business models that can pose a real danger to banks.
Even some representatives of the establishment are beginning to sound like Silicon Valley raiders in suits.
“Many conventional banks are going to fall by the wayside,” according to Francisco González.
“Those that make it will no longer be ‘ banks,’but software companies, competing with the digital players and with a completely different value proposition.”
Last year González, Chairman and CEO of Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA), a major Spanish bank, predicted that up to half of banks around the world would disappear in the wake of this digital disruption.
Those that make it will no longer be “banks”, but software companies.
One look at Amazon ’s transformation of the retail sector, Airbnb ’s disruption of the hotel industry, and Uber ’s blow to the taxi indus- try shows that banks had better take these ambitious upstarts seriously.
“Other – typically unregulated – industries have reset consumer expectations when it comes to the customer experience.
This results in pent-up demand within financial services.
The incumbents, however, are preoccupied with other activities and this opens the door for new entrants,” says James Dickerson, Program Director, Fintech Innovation Lab, Accenture, in London.
Banks were able to avoid the violent upheavals of digitalization for quite a while.
So according to Dickerson, “Banks have not been forced to innovate to compete like other industries have because the regulator has shielded them.
In addition to that, this industry is much more complex than, say, transportation, retail or music and therefore more difficult to disrupt.”
There are now only four specimens of the oldest shares in the world in existence.
13th /14th century
Banks
In the late Middle Ages, the city states of Florence, Genoa and Venice revolutionized finance.
Their role in this is still reflected today in words borrowed from Italian, like giro, account and credit.
The Medici family established the first modern bank in Florence.
Stock Exchanges/Shares
The Dutch East India Company was founded in 1602.
It secured capital in a completely new way:
It issued shares.
The company also established the first securities exchange in the world, the Amsterdam stock exchange.
Credit Cards
In 1950 American businessman Frank McNamara invented the first credit card that could be used everywhere, not just in one store:
the Diner ’s Club card.
In just one year, more than 42,000 Americans had one.
ATMs
Paul Volcker, former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, maliciously said once that the automatic teller machine was “the only financial innovation” of any use in modern times.
The first ATM was installed in London in 1967.
You could withdraw the grand sum of 10 pounds.
Photos:
G.
Nimatallah/De Agostini Picture Library/akg -images; Pictures from History/ullstein bild;
Top Ten
The highest-valued Fintech startups (in billion USD):
10 8 6 4 2 0 Lufax (now lu.
com, China) Zhong An Online (Hong Kong) Stripe (USA) Social Finance (SoFi, USA) Credit Karma (USA) Powa Technologies (GB) Mozido (USA) Adyen (NL) Klarna (SE) Avant (USA)
Source:
Crunchbase, WSJ.
com
In fact, reality has relativized investors’high expectations.
The challengers are still in the starting blocks, and very few Fintechs have been able to conquer noteworthy market shares.
No Tsunami And even as aggressive attackers from California ’s technology valley who want to turn the industry on its head make their pronouncements, Accenture consultant Julian Skan takes a more relaxed view on Fintech.
“We do n’t think this is a tsunami that will destroy the sector.”
Skan certainly believes that digital transformation holds the potential to reduce the role and relevance of traditional banks, but at the same time those banks could, like the startups, use that technology to create faster, better and cheaper services.
“We have always felt that this will depend on speed, that the value will be created largely through the existing banks, and that the faster they adopt the technology, the better their first-mover advantage will be.”
Many startups and banks are taking note.
They have now moved from confrontation to cooperation.
Both sides could derive great benefit from these developments.
Banks can profit from the Fintech ’s knowhow, their agility and proximity to young
Uber, the mobile ride request company:
request, ride, pay, get a receipt with your smartphone.
customers by integrating Fintech ’s innovations in their own products.
On the other side, Fintechs want to make use of the established banks’expertise acquired over centuries, their familiar brands, gigantic customer base, licenses and, not least, their customers’trust.
Even startup entrepreneurs – by definition, optimists – know that this will help them improve their poor odds of survival.
According to the statistics, 80 to 90 percent of all technology startups disappear within a few years of their founding.
One study by Stanford and the University of California at Berkeley concluded that a massive 92 percent of tech startups failed within the first three years.
Young entrepreneurs have an even harder time in the strictly regulated financial industry than in other sectors.
Frenemies As a result, Fintechs and banks are increasingly going over to the frenemies principle, as illustrated by the cooperation between SoFi and Credit Suisse.
A rival (enemy) you depend on becomes a business partner (friend).
Credit Suisse manages its own Fintech investment fund, Credit Suisse NEXT, which, for example, was the leading investor in a 165 million dollar financing round for Prosper, a peer-to-peer lending platform.
(Peer-to-peer refers to an arrangement in which private individuals are connected directly with each other, not as conventionally, companies connected with private individuals.
) Urs Rohner, Chairman of the Board of Directors of Credit Suisse, says, “In the end, cooperation remains the most promising option, both for established banks and for innovative startups.
It helps by reducing increasing cost pressures and by increasing the efficiency of process flows, and all of this helps increase the longevity of your business.”
Other banks are cultivating frenemy relationships with Fintechs too.
JP Morgan Chase, for instance, recently merged with On Deck Capital, a peer-to-peer lender, in order to offer loans to small businesses over the internet.
Canada ’s Scotiabank, together with investors like Santander and ING, is investing 135 million dollars in Kabbage, a step aimed at opening the path to coopera-
Working with traditional banks:
On TransferWise ’s platform, funds can be inexpensively transferred from one currency area to another.
(Photo:
the company ’s office in the Shoreditch district of London).
tion between the trio of banks and the American operator of a platform for small business lending.
Taulia, a financial supply chain company, is cooperating with the Royal Bank of Scotland and has obtained risk capital
Frenemies:
a rival (enemy) you depend on becomes a business partner (friend).
from BBVA Ventures.
“The global reach of BBVA in Europe, North and South America will support Taulia ’s global expansion over the coming years,” said Markus Ament, a German co-founder of San Francisco-based Taulia, who like so many young entrepreneurs wears a beard out of biblical times.
“Banks finally now see that parts of their traditional business are at risk.
Smart financial institutions are now engaging, either through investments, partnerships, or by their own internal incubators to drive innovation.”
Even TransferWise, a startup whose peer-to-peer platform allows users to transfer funds to a different currency area at fees lower than banks, is allying with banks.
The London-based company ’s email welcoming new members still declares, “Congrats on waving your bank bye bye.”
Nonetheless, in December TransferWise entered into an initial agreement to work with LHV, Estonia ’s largest bank.
TransferWise members can now use its services through the LHV app and website.
More such agreements are expected to follow in Europe and the US since transfer technology can be set up through online market places, mobile communications operators and any number of other digital services.
Fintech Is a Top Priority The lion ’s share of investments is made in startups in Silicon Valley, New York and London.
By contrast, Switzerland and even Germany are still developing countries when it comes to Fintech.
There are hundreds of startups in Zurich, Geneva and Berlin, and incubators and Fintech experimental laboratories are supported.
So to
UK Prime Minister David Cameron supports the UK Fintech 2020 Manifesto.
Goal:
attract eight billion pounds in investment to the industry and create 100,000 new jobs.
some extent banks are investing and entering into cooperation agreements with startups, or networking with them to pick up on their initiative.
But outside the US, the action is on the banks of the Thames, in startup districts like Soho, Tottenham and Shoreditch.
More than half of all European capital invested in Fintech companies is in those three areas.
“London is good at both fin and tech.”
London is an attractive financial center, with its relaxed regulations, countless financial experts and developers, a startup culture similar to Silicon Valley that has developed over decades and the largescale venture capital scene and international flair to go with it.
The fact that Prime Minister David Cameron long ago made promotion of London Fintech a top priority has n’t hurt either.
The British prime minister supports the UK Fintech 2020 Manifesto issued by the London-based Innovate Finance, an association of Fintech companies that aims to attract eight billion pounds for the industry and create 100,000 new Fintech jobs.
If George Osborne has his way, London will become “the global center for Fintech.”
The UK ’s Finance Minister announced in November that London is “good at both fin and tech.”
We are still waiting for comparable pronouncements from Germany and Switzerland.
Helene Laube is a freelance journalist in San Francisco.
She was a founding member of Financial Times Deutschland and was its longtime Silicon Valley correspondent.
Prior to that she was the editor of Manager Magazin in Hamburg.
Her articles have also appeared in media such as Financial Times, Zeit Online, brand eins Wissen, Stern, Capital, Technology Review, Bilanz and Du.
“It ’s about the jobs.”
Switzerland is well positioned for the future of the finance industry, according to this Credit Suisse specialist.
But something is still missing for a spot on the world map.
Interview:
Simon Brunner, Photography:
Simon Habegger “Some lines of business will disappear.”
Christine Schmid.
Ms. Schmid, what does the Fintech innovation wave mean for traditional banks?
On the one hand, it means competition for individual products and services, and on the other, Fintech products and platforms enable traditional banks to offer their products, processes and services more quickly, securely and more in line with customer needs.
So traditional banks also see an opportunity in the Fintech industry.
Twelve billion dollars of venture capital were invested in Fintechs in 2014, and even Facebook has a banking license.
Are we approaching the end of the major bank?
Fintech companies are changing the banking industry – no question about it.
From our perspective they will not replace traditional banks, but they will change them significantly.
We anticipate that individual lines of business will disappear, for instance, payments.
In general, you can say that banks profit from the innovations, whether through better and quicker data analysis, greater security or higher volumes and lower costs thanks to automation.
Banks have begun those transformations and completely new job profiles have come into existence in recent years, for instance we are now hiring data scientist experience designers, algorithmic risk specialists and community advocacy builders.
The titles of these jobs reveal that digitalization is happening everywhere.
Many observers expect that Fintech companies will put more pressure on margins.
How can banks avoid that?
There ’s no question that margins in banking are falling.
But, from our perspective, Fintech is just one reason for this.
Central banks’interest policies and the customer investment strategies that are a result of these policies lead to lower interest margins and commission earnings.
Regulatory rules exert further pressure on margins.
Increased transparency and automation through central clearing entities reduce margins in trading.
How can banks work against these trends?
Improved efficiency or, to put it simply, measures to reduce costs, automation, and finally critical size are all relevant factors.
Banks are focusing more and more intensely on their core business, where they have critical size.
Lines of business or units in individual countries that are too small will be or have been sold.
Did banks simply sleep through the Fintech trend?
In the beginning, just after the financial crisis, financial institutions were preoccupied with their own problems.
They were focused on survival, then on the new regulations and strategic reorientation.
The wave of innovations quickly moved into the foreground during this process.
The banks we are in touch with have been mentioning this trend for several years and are very closely following developments in the Fintech area.
Three strategies are pursued:
acquire and integrate startups, which has its risks; joint ventures and cooperation, primarily to more closely analyze the processes; or build something yourself, but that can be somewhat slow.
Christine Schmid is the Head of Global Equity and Credit Research at Credit Suisse.
She joined Credit Suisse in 1993, working first in controlling and then in portfolio management.
She earned a master ’s degree in economics from Zurich University and is a CFA Charterholder and a member of Swiss-American Young Leaders, and she is a lecturer at St. Gallen University.
For example in pharmaceuticals, large companies depend more and more on external research.
They purchase technologies, patents, etc., instead of developing a drug themselves from the outset.
Will that approach take hold in the finance industry?
There is no patent protection in finance, a major difference compared to pharma, which can legally secure multi-billion revenues.
That ’s why investments in research and development were and are very different.
But banks are increasingly trying to acquire startups, enter into joint ventures with them, or quickly “copy” them.
CS is involved in Fintech in various locations.
What are the most important fields and what are the results?
Credit Suisse is involved in Fintech Innovation Labs and mentoring programs in the US, the UK and Asia, as well as mergers in Switzerland.
Most important
Valuable time is being lost in the political discussion, in planning.
are new developments in asset management, security, and developments in the bitcoin field.
Finma wants to promote Fintech startups in different areas, for instance, simplifying compliance for them.
Is that fair to established institutions?
Fundamentally, it ’s about promoting innovation, and, of course, jobs in Switzerland in the long term.
That is positive.
The idea is that regulation and with it, compliance, should be based on the size of the company at the start.
What ’s important for startups in this context is a speedy approval process, with strict, clear and simple rules.
As soon as a startup has reached a certain size, it has to catch up with regulatory rules, so it will be on a par with established banks.
That makes sense.
Protection of the customer, protection of the system, must be ensured whether an established financial institution is involved or a new platform.
In one analysis, you described the weaknesses of our Swiss Fintech scene as a “very academic approach,” which is “too slow,” and “does n’t sell well.”
Can Swiss startups make it internationally?
Absolutely, there are plenty of positive examples.
It would be great, however, if there were a stronger nationwide Swiss voice – especially on the political level – and a flagship event in the Fintech field.
Even while an innovation park like in Dübendorf* is very positive in the long term, at the moment valuable time is being lost in the political discussion, planning and, of course, the physical creation.
Time that competing financial centers are using or have already used.
According to a study by Roland Berger (Swiss Fintech Study 2015), Switzerland does well in talent and skills, and is well respected for its political and legal stability, but there are gaps in financing and political support.
Correct.
There is a lack of official support to position Switzerland as a Fintech hub on the world map.
In good Swiss tradition, individual stakeholders have organized themselves by the various regions of the country.
And financing for really good ideas is there, we do n’t see problems in that regard.
On the contrary, competition among venture investors to invest in Fintech has intensified.
Credit Suisse is active with one fund that invests in Fintech companies.
* A national innovation park is being built on 71 hectares, where “established companies can combine their research and development activities with those of ETH Zurich, the University of Zurich and other technical universities.”
(Dübendorf’s own marketing)
Who, Where, How Much?
Innovative Swiss sectors and where they are located
The high-tech industry* is the clear leader in innovation within Switzerland ’s private sector – especially the pharmaceutical industry.
This industry alone accounts for a third of private expenditures on research
By Sascha Jucker and Nicolas Rapp (map) and development (R&amp; D), and one in ten patents registered in Switzerland is based on the sector ’s research activities.
So it is little wonder that the pharmaceutical industry tops all other sectors in our innovation indi- cator, which was prepared especially for this issue of Bulletin, both in overall terms and per employee.
For this innovation indicator, we take account of the number of patent applications in the various sectors of the Swiss economy as an important innovation factor in addition to R&amp;D expenditures.
Alongside corporate research departments, Swiss universities and universities of applied sciences are also important drivers of innovation, especially for those sectors that carry out little in the way of research themselves.
Of course, innovation happens without patent applications and outside of R&amp;D departments and universities.
Innovation can include new business processes, alternative sales and distribution strategies and completely new business models, such as the
Level of innovation per employee, as measured by cantonal and sector-specific patent applications as well as R&amp;D expenditures by the private sector and universities
Basel/Fricktal Switzerland ’s pharma- ceutical hub
Basel
Above-average
FRANCE
Lausanne
Below-average
Vallée de Joux Many makers of worldrenowned watch brands
Lucerne Berne Geneva sharing economy (Airbnb, Lyft, Uber, etc.).
Due to a lack of data, services innovations are only included in our indicator to a limited extent.
Since we know where the innovative industries in Switzerland are located and how many patents are registered in which cantons, we can use our indicator to approximate the level of innovation per employee and by region.
It reveals that the level of innovation is well above-average in and around Basel, in the Fricktal and southwest of Lake Neuchâtel (Vallée de Joux).
While the pharmaceutical industry is located in the Basel region and the Fricktal, the Vallée de Joux is home to numerous world-renowned luxury watch companies.
These watch companies also play a major role in the innovative region of Neuchâtel and La Chaux-de- Fonds.
St. Gallen ’s Rheintal on the eastern border south of Lake Constance has established itself as a high-tech location, serving as the home for precision technology, precision engineering and optics companies.
Most of Switzerland ’s major cities outside of Basel would be below average in the innovation indicator on a per-employee basis without the inclusion of universities, since many employees in these cities work in service sectors, relatively little is invested in &amp;
Who is innovative?
Innovation, per employee and total, measured in terms of sector-specific patent applications as well as R&amp;D expenditures by the private sector
Pharmaceuticals ICT manufacturing/high -tech instruments Other Research and development Machinery ICT services Chemicals Metals per employee Total 0 1 2 3 4 5 Sources:
OECD, Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Credit Suisse
Zurich
Winterthur
St. Gallen
St. Galler Rheintal home of high-tech industry
GERMANY
Davos
Zug
AUSTRIA
Locarno Lugano
Sources:
OECD, Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Credit Suisse
ITALY
Milan
* Chemicals, IT equipment and electronics, electrical and precision engineering, automotive manufacturing, plastics, mechanical engineering, pharmaceutical and watch industry
Sascha Jucker works in Swiss Industry Research at Credit Suisse der Credit Suisse
“Diversity and Freedom”
Every year, Roche spends nine billion Swiss francs on research, an amount exceeded by only four companies worldwide.
Sophie Kornowski-Bonnet talks about whether it ’s better for companies to purchase innovation or to do it themselves.
Interview:
Simon Brunner
The pharmaceutical company Roche invests nine billion Swiss francs in research and development (R&amp; D) each year.
At the same time, it spends billions on acquisitions.
Is it generally better for large companies to conduct their own research, or to make interesting acquisitions?
I think you need to do both.
Companies in innovative industries always require a strong R&amp;D capability.
They need a solid foundation of knowledge to make the right decisions on both internal projects and external opportunities.
But as you ’re suggesting, I think, a great deal of innovation now takes place outside of companies, and partnerships – in whatever form – are becoming increasingly important to ensure access to such innovation.
Sophie Kornowski-Bonnet, 52, is head of Roche Partnering, the department that oversees external cooperation.
Kornowski-Bonnet holds a doctorate in pharmacy from the Faculty of Pharmacy in Paris and an MBA from the University of Chicago.
She was inducted into the French Legion of Honor in recognition of her contributions to research, and is a member of the Roche Corporate Executive Committee.
Sophie Kornowski-Bonnet is head of Roche Partnering, the department that oversees external cooperation.
Three-quarters of the 30 new drugs with “game-changing potential,” according to Goldman Sachs, were not developed by the pharmaceutical companies that own them today.
Has the time passed when products were developed entirely within a company?
External research has always been important to Roche.
More than a third of our marketed products are the result of external collaboration, and that proportion will remain high going forward.
Truly innovative research is most likely to flourish in companies with strong in-house capabilities, coupled with extensive networks of partnerships with academic institutions, start-ups and other companies.
In the 1980s and 1990s, your competitor Merck was named the “World ’s Most Admired Company” seven times.
Even then, its success was based largely on licensed compounds.
What has since changed?
A great deal!
Science has flourished both externally and internally.
Today much more venture capital is available, IPOs are far more common, very small start-ups are working directly with the largest pharmaceutical companies – all of these changes have fueled a number of external R&amp;D activities that did n’t take place in the past.
There are many partnering models.
How do takeovers, licensing, mergers and collaborations differ?
All of the various partnering models have their own specific mechanisms and a long list of advantages and disadvantages.
The key is to stay flexible so that we can find the best models to suit our needs and those of our partners.
In the current market environment, where valuations are high, we are particularly interested in de-risking and shared-risk models in which we conduct projects with external partners step by step, and share the costs and revenues upon reaching our agreed goals.
Our partners participate in both the profits and the risk, which minimizes bad investments and conflicts of interest.
The important thing is for all involved to benefit from whatever partnering model is chosen.
Our primary motivation is to develop drugs that offer substantial benefits to patients.
Your job might be compared to that of a soccer talent scout.
How do you find the next Messi or Ronaldo?
We screen over 2,500 opportunities for cooperation each year, but in the end we conclude only between 50 and 100 deals annually.
For the most part, our success can be attributed to hard work and the fact that we conduct the necessary research – we look for the assets we need and the right partners to work with.
We are interested in university-based projects that are still in the very early stages, as well as mid- to later-stage ideas developed by other companies, and we also look into acquisitions.
But it ’s not just about “winning” against thousands of competitors.
But rather...?
We show what Roche has to offer in terms of scientific, commercial and manufacturing expertise, and we work together with potential partners to determine whether it ’s the right fit.
Not all competitors are alike; they ’re not all interested in the same deals.
To return to your analogy:
One team might be looking for a striker, another for a defender.
Likewise, biotechs and start-ups seeking partnerships have certain ideas about the companies they want to work with.
Pharmaceuticals is recognized as being one of the world ’s most innovative industries.
What is the secret of Roche ’s success in keeping a spirit of ingenuity alive over the course of decades?
In my view, diversity is one of the most important factors in our model ’s success.
We do n’t have a global head of R&amp;D.
We maintain several independent units for pharmaceutical research, and they have a great deal of freedom.
Another indication of the success of our model is that we will be introducing as many as six new drugs in the next 18 months – more than ever before over such a brief period of time.
In 2009, Roche acquired Genentech for nearly 50 billion dollars.
One of the big challenges in acquiring a company is to merge two different cultures.
How have you been able to reconcile Californian and Swiss attitudes toward work?
Here, too, we have embraced diversity.
Only our global functions have been integrated; our research and early clinical development units continue to operate separately.
And this holds true not only for Genentech – each Roche site has its specific local culture and flavor.
Other companies may choose a centralized approach, but for our part, we believe that diversity and freedom are essential for Roche’s dynamism and innovative capacity.
Good Ideas Do n’t Come Cheap
Switzerland is considered to be the most innovative country in the world.
It has an abundance of knowledge and good people.
When it comes to venture capital, however, there is room for improvement.
By Sara Carnazzi Weber and Jan Riss
0.08 of GDP 0.06 0.04 277,185 Total investment in Switzerland absolute in thousands of EUR 170,153 225,240 181,737
For the fifth time in a row, Switzerland took first place in the Global Innovation Index in 2015, earning the right to call itself “the world ’s most innovative country.”
The GII, an annual assessment of countries’innovative capability and the measurable innovations they have achieved, ranks Switzerland at the top with regard to human capital as well as research and development (page 14).
But much remains to be done.
There is room for improvement in the basic conditions for financing innovative projects, which are critically important when seeking to translate enormous potential into practice.
And in an aging society with little growth in the working population, ever new innovations are needed to generate growth and prosperity.
In most cases, it takes a great deal of capital to turn an idea into a product that can be launched on the market.
Putting scientific knowledge into practice is expensive, and creating a company usually involves high fixed costs.
Young entrepreneurs who lack large amounts of collateral often have trouble obtaining loans.
It is therefore especially important to raise off-market capital.
Capital and Knowledge Venture capital is a common approach to financing a business ’s start-up phase.
As is generally the case with private equity, investors tend to reap generous returns if the company proves successful.
There is also substantial risk of default, more than with other types of investments.
Company founders, who frequently lack experience, are supported with expertise in business management as well as provided with capital.
Those who say that risk financing is underdeveloped in Switzerland are mistaken.
Indeed, a lively market for venture capital has developed over the past
Switzerland Is Average among European Countries
Share of venture investments relative to GDP.
Later venture phase, Switzerland Start-up phase Switzerland Seed phase Switzerland Later venture phase, Europe Start-up phase, Europe Seed phase, Europe 201,639 181,690 183,607 168,922 0.02 0 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source:
Invest Europe two decades.
This is reflected in the most recent figures from Invest Europe, a European association representing providers of venture capital.
In terms of the ratio of investments in venture capital to gross domestic product (GDP), Switzerland ranks above the European average – fifth after Sweden, Finland, Ireland and the UK.
In Switzerland, the level of venture capital investments during the start-up phase exceeds the average, while investments in the period prior to market launch (seed investments) and the later venture phase are at an average level.
Throughout Europe, the ratio of investments to GDP has declined since 2007.
The life sciences sector, however, is showing an upward trend.
Its share of total venture capital investments increased from 60 percent in 2007 to approximately 88 percent in 2014.
Linking research, technology and business:
Zurich ’s Technopark.
Good News In an effort to maintain Switzerland ’s position as a highly innovative country, the federal government is working to improve the relevant framework conditions.
While
Bringing capital and good ideas together continues to be a problem in Switzerland.
several cantonal economic development agencies have introduced initiatives to promote development and networking, direct government funding for start-ups is the exception, in contrast to a number of other countries.
There is the potential for improvement in incentives and conditions to encourage research activity (education policy, regarding both schools and universities, taxation, simplified administrative procedures, etc.).
This, in turn, would make room for a multitude of private initiatives to promote forward-looking, innovative business ideas.
Those involved might include private individuals and entrepreneurs who, as “angel investors,” quietly invest in companies and offer the benefit of their knowledge and contacts during the early stages.
It should be noted, however, that in many cases financial resources are not put to best use, owing to a lack of professional expertise.
Given Switzerland ’s wealth, resources should, in fact, be available.
Bringing capital and good ideas together continues to be a problem in Switzerland.
Overall, there is no indication that a lack of venture capital systematically interferes with the implementation and marketing of new product ideas.
Finally, the good news:
The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich reported more spin-offs in 2015 than ever before.
SVC – Ltd. for Risk Capital for SMEs In cooperation with the Swiss Venture Club (SVC), Credit Suisse provides venture capital totaling up to 100 million Swiss francs to small and medium-sized businesses and start-ups.
These funds are made available to innovative companies during various stages of development, in the form of additional equity capital or as loans with profit participation.
The focus is on strengthening Switzerland ’s employment base and creating and preserving jobs.
The capital is managed by SVC Ltd. for Risk Capital for SMEs, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Credit Suisse and strategic partner of SVC that is active throughout Switzerland.
www.svc-risikokapital.ch
Sara Carnazzi Weber is head of Fundamental Macro Research at Credit Suisse.
Jan Riss completed an internship in that department.
Subscribe to Bulletin …
…
or order other Credit Suisse publications free of charge at www.credit-suisse.com/shop (publications shop).
Electronic newsletters on current topics related to business, society, culture, and sports are available for subscription at www.credit-suisse.com/newsletter.
Art (istry)
Video art explores a third dimension:
A light-filled ceiling projection created by Swiss artist Pipilotti Rist for the 2005 Venice Biennale.
Pipilotti Rist, “Homo Sapiens Sapiens”, 2005, Audio Video Installation, installation view San Stae Church, La Biennale di Venezia, Venice, Italy (2005).
Courtesy the artist, Hauser&amp;Wirth and Luhring Augustine.
Photos:
Stefan Altenburger Photography Zurich; Heiner H. Schmitt Jr.
Artist and artworks have changed the world.
We spoke with James Koch, director of the Hauser&amp;Wirth gallery in Zurich, about five modern works that made their mark on art history.
By Daniele Muscionico
A new era in art:
Mark Rothko ’s color field paintings are among Abstract Expressionism ’s most important works.
They encourage the viewer to engage with the picture.
Mark Rothko, Sketch for “Mural No. 4”, 1958, oil, glue, egg, natural resin and synthetic resin on canvas, 265.8 × 379.4 cm.
Collection of Kawamura Memorial DIC Museum of Art.
© 1998 Kate Rothko Prizel&amp;Christopher Rothko/2016, ProLitteris, Zurich; Joseph Beuys, “Feuerstätte II”, 1978 – 1979, installation with elements of copper, iron, felt, Kunstmuseum Basel, gift of the artist with the participation of the Fasnachts-Clique Alti Richtig et al 1979.
Courtesy Kunstmuseum Basel.
© 2016, ProLitteris, Zurich.
Photo:
Gina Folly
Social sculpture:
In addition to being an unusual work of performance art, Joseph Beuys ’s “Feuerstätte” is a “social” artwork because it gets people involved.
Who was first?
Who has imitators and secret copiers?
And how many?
It ’s true of the goods market, and it ’s also true of the art market:
Whatever is truly new is innovative, but there ’s more to it than that.
Innovation can mean using a medium in a different way, reinterpreting, reevaluating a familiar material – or it may involve a response to something happening in society, the anticipation of a trend.
What is a mutant, giant spider doing outside of a zoological laboratory?
It is innovative, since it lays claim to being art; innovative art is a collaboration with an unexpected context that generates new meaning.
James Koch is one of the executive directors of Hauser&amp;Wirth, which was described by the British magazine Art Review as the world ’s most important gallery.
He selected five modern works for Bulletin that he considers to be artistically innovative.
Koch manages the branch of the Hauser&amp;Wirth Group in Zurich.
A charming art connoisseur, Koch speaks with such passion about art and artists that it is evident that the works he has chosen have personal significance for him.
The name of the work, in English “Hearth”, is a metaphor for warmth, energy, life.
Copper rods forming a circle, gray felt suits piled up to form a sculpture:
James Koch is also attracted to this work for reasons of family history.
“Beuys was a significant performance artist of the 20th century, and he had an impact on both society and politics.
My father, who was a member of one of the traditional groups that celebrate Fasnacht, or carnival, in Switzerland, had a personal connection to the creation of that artwork.”
Beuys is one of the most important contemporary artists, Koch says, and some of his work is still misunderstood.
This installation – the most significant piece in the Beuys collection at Basel ’s Museum für Gegenwartskunst – points to the humanism of Koch ’s hometown and the importance of art to Basel.
An innovative aspect of “Feuerstätte II” is that it allows people to participate in “soziale Skulptur” (Koch).
In 1978, Beuys roamed through the streets of Basel with the “Alti Richtig” carnival group, and he later used some of the group ’s equipment for satirical purposes.
It is also significant that Beuys merged tradition and customs with a type of art that had by no means gained acceptance.
But Beuys, who was both clever and PR-savvy, knew what he was doing.
His performance, coordinated with Basel ’s carnival, earned him widespread popular support, and also helped him recruit ambassadors for his art – which sought to change society.
A video renaissance Pipilotti Rist, San Stae, “Homo Sapiens Sapiens,” 2005
Is this what a painting on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel looks like?
Yes, when it is reimagined for the modern age by Swiss artist Pipilotti Rist.
Rist has liberated video art from the display screen and expanded it to include a third dimension.
Her video art enters the room – and is, in itself, a kind of room, a space where the viewer ’s imagination can wander.
Rist ’s video is a post-Renaissance concept, something that is familiar in the work of countless artists today.
For the 2005 Biennale, Rist created a technically complex “painting” of pure light to project onto the ceiling of a pope ’s burial vault.
Her work, contrasting with Michelangelo ’s monumental “Erweckung des Adam,” depicts the sensual, nude figures of two sisters dancing.
From what perspective did visitors view it when it was originally shown in San Stae?
Sometimes they would lie on the soft cloth “leaves” of a gigantic branch, close to the sky and at one with the wild women in the projection.
“It is an innovation to be able to step into a work of art,” says James Koch.
“It ’s impressive that the artist has been successful with the medium and remained true to it.”
He quotes Pipilotti Rist:
“Video is like a handbag, with room for painting, literature and music.”
But innovation also goes hand in hand with incomprehension, resistance and scandal.
Fundamentalist groups forced the installation in Venice to close prematurely.
Art is social Joseph Beuys, “Feuerstätte (the Hearth) II,” 1978/79
See for yourself Mark Rothko, “The Seagram Murals,” ca.
1958 – 1970
Rothko ’s work marks a break with the past and the beginning of a new era in art.
No one can remain unmoved after visiting this room, which was painstakingly created by Mark Rothko down to the last detail.
He determined precisely how his paintings were to be hung and illuminated; if it had been possible, he would no doubt have specified the appropriate distance between viewer and painting.
Rothko (1903 – 1970), an American artist, is a master of effects and judgments, color values and energies.
“The Seagram Murals,” a series of paintings that London ’s Tate Modern hung together to form a single work of art, are like a sanctuary where the secular can meditate.
Thousands and thousands of painters have imitated Rothko over the past 50 years.
“I think of my pictures as dramas,” he said.
“The shapes in the pictures are the performers.”
James Koch considers Rothko to be one of the most important artists of Abstract Expressionism and color field painting, which emerged in the United States in the mid- 1950s.
“His innovation was to encourage interaction between the viewer and the picture.
Even those who are relatively unfamiliar with monochromatic painting will get goosebumps when they first encounter Rothko ’s work.
I will never forget when I first saw it, when I was a young boy.”
Rothko ’s use of color makes abstract art accessible.
Koch points out how Rothko experimented with color and paint in a way that made even the process of creating the painting generate a kind of magic.
The surfaces of Rothko ’s paintings are luminescent, with gleaming colors.
They sometimes glow like a single pixel; sometimes they are cloudy and blurred.
Looking at Rothko ’s use of color, we see how color fields begin to take on a life of their own.
Rothko wanted the relationship between the picture and the viewer to be a function only of the colors and their impact, and that was why he avoided representational images.
Silence, meditation, ultimate concerns.
Rothko ’s works speak the language of pure color, and the viewer becomes part of the picture – indeed, perhaps part of art itself.
In the web of biography Louise Bourgeois, “Maman,” 1999
The spider, made of bronze and steel, is nine meters tall, but her legs are slender and as fragile as those of a prima ballerina.
In a sac on her body, “Maman” carries 29 white marble eggs.
The viewer ’s initial shock gives way to sympathy, and fear is mixed with respect.
We admire what this monumental monster is secretly bringing forth.
It was thanks in part to James Koch that Fondation Beyeler ’s bronze casting of “Maman” was exhibited in Zurich, Berne and Geneva in 2011.
But this was not the only reason why he chose to show us this work, one of the most important and well-known creations of French-American sculptor Louise Bourgeois (1911 – 2010).
Koch explains why Bourgeois was innovative:
“She was one of the most important artists of the 20th century.
Particularly impressive are her innovative, radical pictorial language and the symbolism of her drawings and gouaches, her textile works, but also her
Seduction through aesthetics:
In his light installations, conceptual artist Bruce Nauman plays with the messages that advertising sends, promising us happiness and a better life.
large sculptures.
To understand Bourgeois and her work, you have to understand her spiders, particularly this oversized piece about her mother.
Her mother worked as a tapestry restorer in Paris, replacing old fabric with new.
The sculpture honors Bourgeois ’s mother by depicting a spider as a symbol, a creature that incessantly spins the threads of life.
“This combination of the terrifying and the protective, the image of a mother who weaves the threads of family, has a very ambivalent impact,” says Koch.
It is also notable that the spider was created in 1999, when Bourgeois was over 80 years old.
She was not widely recognized until very late in life.
That, too, is part of innovation:
It is only achieved through consensus and the public.
In a critical light Bruce Nauman, “Having Fun/Good Life, Symptoms,” 1985
In this case, the artist ’s innovation lies in anticipating what is latent, festering, in society.
This work is particularly innovative because it is visually appealing, seductive, aesthetically pleasing.
It depicts the two “wheels of fortune” that make up our lives:
a glittering whirlpool, an emotional, evocative, never-ending game.
Bruce Nauman is innovative because he has inspired so many other artists, Koch explains, and because his works deal with sensory perception.
Nauman, an Amer-
Bruce Nauman (American b.
1941), “Having Fun/Good Life, Symptoms”, 1985, fabricated neon, 175.26 × 333.53 × 34.29 cm, Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh.
Purchase:
gift of the partners of Reed Smith Shaw and McClay and Carnegie International Acquisition Fund, 85.32.
© 2016 Bruce Nauman/2016, ProLitteris, Zurich.
Photo:
© 2016 Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; Courtesy Hauser &amp;Wirth; Louise Bourgeois, “Maman (Ama),” 1999, 2001 cast bronze, marble and stainless steel.
Photo:
David Ramos/Bloomberg/Getty Images.
ican artist born in 1941, began his career as a painter, then turned to film, sculpture and performance art.
In his key works, he introduces material that he borrowed from another context, namely the commercial sector and advertising:
He used neon light to evoke the “good life.”
Nauman created conceptual art, and it plays with a message whispered in our ears by advertisers:
“We ’re having fun.”
But they only allege that we ’re having fun; the neon spirals suggest movement, but are actually standing still.
One spiral shows slogans about never-ending fun; the other contains a contradictory message showing the price we pay for a life of luxury, says James Koch:
“up and down” and “in and out.”
Even those words are written in luminous, fluorescent lettering, since with the help of the right colors you can do a brilliant job of selling even misfortune.
Nauman ’s concept is innovative because it communicates a social message through a medium that advertisers have claimed as their own.
But these wheels of fortune, with their critical commentary on our lives, can do still more.
They combine two types of art to form a new, third, kind:
Installation is merged with performance, alleged movement with actual stasis – a zero-sum game.
James Koch, born in Basel in 1973, studied law and worked for a leading law firm before following his heart to pursue a career in the art world, first as the commercial director of Fondation Beyeler, and since 2014 as executive director of the Swiss branch of the Hauser&amp;Wirth gallery in Zurich.
Daniele Muscionico is a prizewinning journalist who writes about art and culture for the Neue Zürcher Zeitung.
Mother spider:
Louise Bourgeois’gigantic bronze spider symbolizes the artist’s own mother and honors her as a creature that spins the threads of life.
It Does n’t Always Have to Be Digital
“A trade in hand finds gold in every land,” says the proverb.
Manufacturers are developing carbon sailing masts, automatic honeycombs, or the first Nigerian car brand:
A portfolio of small and medium-sized enterprises from around the world, succeeding because of – or in spite of – unusual ideas.
Illustrations by Stephan Walter
From the Sea to the Farmer ’s Field
King Composite came very close to striking its sails.
Two decades ago, Guillermo Mariani began building masts for racing sailboats from carbon fiber, a new material at the time.
The San Fernando-based company survived Argentina ’s national bankruptcy because it had sought out affluent clients, especially from across the Atlantic – in Spain, Italy and Greece.
Everything was going well – until the crisis year of 2008, which hit southern Europe ’s economy hard and made sailboats an unnecessary luxury product.
It seemed that the Argentine company was going to go under – but then the crew caught sight of land.
Today, the company is considered the top innovator in Argentina ’s agricultural technology sector.
In mid-2015, King Agro signed an exclusive contract with agricultural machinery conglomerate John Deere, which now distributes worldwide the idea that kept the company afloat.
But how did this come about?
Applying its expertise in carbon mast technology, King Composite expanded into crop-protection machinery (and added “Agro” to the company name).
Since 1996, when Argentina began permitting the use of genetically modified seed, agriculture in the pampas has radically changed.
The land under cultivation has grown from 20 to 33 million hectares.
At the same time, the government imposed high export taxes on soy, wheat and corn, forcing farmers to trim costs wherever they could.
The key to this is direct sowing, in which the soil is not disturbed through tilling, thereby saving work time and preventing soil erosion.
However, this technique requires regular pest and disease control.
These agents are traditionally sprayed from airplanes.
Or they can be applied by special tractors, which in Argentina are known as “pulverizadoras.”
Some 5,000 to 7,000 of these machines are currently in use in the agricultural country – and the number is growing, because the new government has removed export barriers and lowered customs duties.
To distribute their load across the fields, the tractors extend a telescopic boom on each side, with hoses and spray nozzles attached.
Conventionally made of steel, these booms are quite heavy.
And this is where the mast-builders from the sailing industry stepped in:
The King engineers built carbon booms that can replace the existing steel structures.
Carbon fiber is six times stiffer than steel and resistant to sprays.
Most importantly, the material is 5.5 times lighter than the metal.
By switching to carbon booms, a spraying machine can be enlarged from its original span of 25 meters to 32, 36, and even 45 meters, without becoming any heavier.
This enables the operator to work larger areas in the same amount of time.
Furthermore, broader spans mean less loss due to ruts, ultimately increasing the yield by 1 percent.
This may seem unremarkable, but 1 percent greater yield on every field in Argentina would equal 400 million dollars more each year coming into the country.
And though retrofitting is relatively expensive, at about 40,000 US dollars per tractor, it pays for itself after two years, according to the company.
“We believe that the telescopic booms are just the beginning,” says Guillermo Mariani.
“Carbon fiber has significant advantages in agriculture:
greater productivity, lower operating costs and less soil compaction.”
So far, 250 spraying machines in Argentina are using carbon booms.
But after the renovation of a factory in the city of Campana and the contract with John Deere, all signs point to expansion.
King Agro can now build up to 1,000 booms per year.
“The market is growing by 50 percent each year,” says Alejandro Colla with satisfaction.
He once won medals racing sailboats.
But those days are long gone.
(Text:
Andreas Fink)
Name
King Agro
Industry
Agriculture
Where
San Fernando, Argentinia
Employees
Founded
1983
Name
Flow Hive
Industry
Beekeeping
Where
Byron Bay, Australia
Employees
Founded
The First Million Is the Easiest
The first million is said to be the hardest.
Not so for Cedar and Stuart Anderson, whose coffers were filled with two million US dollars in less than 48 hours – in the brave new world of crowdfunding!
The two Australians had set a goal of 70,000 dollars for their internet campaign publicizing a beehive that extracts honey through a tap directly into jars – an invention they call “FlowTM Hives.”
They met their goal in less than an hour.
Eight weeks later, the father and son team had orders and capital amounting to 12.4 million dollars – and a new problem.
Instead of building a few hundred FlowTM Hives, they now had to fill more than 24,000 orders from 150 countries.
Their innovative source of honey was the most successful campaign ever for the California-based Indiegogo crowdfunding platform, which ranks among the pioneers of this type of online fundraising.
The principle:
A project or product must convince as many people as possible to support it in advance.
In return – provided that enough capital is pledged – funders receive the product or, for example, see a proposed film become reality through their contribution.
Crowdfunders support charitable organizations simply by making contributions.
Indiegogo puts campaigns on the web for free, but it keeps 5 percent of the collected capital.
The FlowTM Hives project was a sensation, but its success hardly came overnight.
The hobby beekeepers had tinkered for ten years, seeking a way to separate the honey from the honeycomb more easily.
They tested prototypes for three years.
When they were sure their invention worked, they were eager to market it.
Cedar Anderson grew up in an alternative community co-founded by his father, Stuart, near Byron Bay on the east coast of Australia.
He loved honey and had kept bees since he was six years old.
However, he was less at home in the world of venture capital.
Crowdfunding seemed to be
Stuart (left) and Cedar Anderson with their FlowTM Hive beehive.
the perfect solution.
He could produce to meet the demand, since his customers paid in advance.
And there were more of them than he expected:
Over 37,000 supporters invested in the Australian patent whose purpose was to make life easier for beekeepers and bees alike.
Unlike in conventional methods, the FlowTM Hive does not need to be taken apart to harvest the honey.
The honeycomb frames are preformed cell systems made of synthetic material.
When the bees have filled them and sealed them with wax, they are separated by turning a lever.
The honey flows through a tube directly into the jar.
When the beekeeper turns the lever back, the tap closes, the cells are rejoined, and the bees can begin to fill the comb again.
According to Elena Ginebreda-Frendel of Indiegogo, one reason for the Australians’success was their thorough preparation.
“The product was well thought out, and at the same time the family was great at making the most of social media, building a huge fan base well in advance,” says the Indiegogo representative.
“By the time the campaign opened, admirers had already clicked the ‘ Like’button 80,000 times.”
The million-dollar haul stoked enormous media interest, which in turn brought new fans into the huge online community.
A video of the invention, filmed by Cedar ’s sister, Mirabei Nicholson-McKellar, has been viewed more than 30 million times online.
Meanwhile, the supporters are summoning their patience.
The next challenge for the Andersons is to meet the enormous demand.
And crowdfunding ca n’t help them much in that regard.
(Text:
Julica Jungehülsing)
The Happiest Company in Japan
Towards the end of December, the lights go out at Mirai Industry.
At 4:45 pm – the normal closing time – the factory halls fall silent at this small building technology business in Gifu, two hours west of Tokyo by train.
Machines that otherwise churn out plastic parts every few seconds stand still.
Computer screens remain dark – for more than two weeks.
Anyone who calls during this time hears only a friendly voice on the answering machine.
When the employees of Mirai Industry come back to work in the new year, they have enjoyed more days off than most Japanese workers will take all year.
True, every full-time worker in Japan is entitled to about 20 vacation days per year.
But the average worker takes only half of them:
This “gift” to their employer is considered good form.
At Mirai Industry, the opposite is true.
Including weekends and the period when the factory is closed, each employee has 140 days off.
In addition, they each have 40 days of paid vacation per year.
Many people have a hard time believing that a company like this could stay in the black, least of all in Japan, where a constant presence in the office is essential to any career.
But this is exactly what Mirai Industry has done ever since its founding in 1965.
In March of 2015, with 900 employees, it recorded revenues of 28.6 billion yen (235 million Swiss francs).
Part of this success is grounded in the company philosophy, which is posted on the walls everywhere:
“Tsune ni kangaeru” (“Always think!”
).
Every suggestion, no matter how workable, is rewarded with at least 500 yen.
That ’s enough for a simple lunch.
Really good ideas win prizes of up to 30,000 yen.
And indeed, the think-tank approach has boosted the product mix to more than 10,000 different items – from plastic casings for switches to cutting tools to vinyl housings for electrical cables, making Mirai Industry the leader in niche markets.
The building technology company holds 80 percent of the market share for light switch boxes in Japan.
And yet, the company ’s name is not widely known.
“Our products are mostly built into the walls or floor,” explains one manager.
Takuji Nomura, a young engineer, says his friends envy him, often asking “Do you actually do any work?”
He laughs.
His friends often have to stay late at the office.
Nomura readily admits that he applied at Mirai Industry because of the shorter working day.
Standing next to him, his supervisor shows no surprise.
Longtime managing director Katsuhiro Takigawa, now retired, says, “We think it ’s important for our employees to work with full commitment for eight hours and have their evenings to relax.”
Overtime is not allowed.
“We could n’t add those costs to the products out of the blue,” says Takigawa.
But that ’s not the only reason:
“The workday is eight hours long, and then our employees should get eight hours of sleep every night.
Then there are four hours for the morning routine, showering, eating and commuting.
That leaves a good four hours for personal time, hobbies and the like.”
Making sure that employees had enough free time was already important to the firm ’s founder, Akio Yamada, who had a passion for theater.
He had worked in his father ’s company for 15 years.
When he was 34, the boss told him he was n’t working hard enough – and showed him the door.
Yamada took this experience to heart.
With friends from his acting troupe, he founded Mirai Industry (Mirai means “future” in Japanese).
Right from the start, he initiated the (then highly unusual) five-day week and flat hierarchies.
In return, his employees hustled all the harder.
“We have zero turnover,” says former managing director Takigawa.
Hundreds of people apply for every opening.
No wonder Mirai Industries is known as “the happiest company in Japan.”
Why do other Japanese companies find it so hard to change their culture?
“They ’re afraid of how their customers will react,” says Takigawa.
At first, some customers were irritated that Mirai Industry shuts down for at least two weeks in midwinter.
But because they also noticed how hard its employees worked to solve problems and respond to customers’requirements, they have remained loyal to this unusual company.
(Text:
Sonja Blaschke)
Name
Mirai Kogyo
Industry
Building technology
Where
Gifu, Japan
Employees
Founded
1965
Name
Friesens Corporation
Industry
Printing
Where
Altona, Canada
Employees
Founded
When the Printing Company Belongs to Its Employees
Thirty-six years ago, the owners of Friesens, a Canadian company that prints high-quality illustrated books, came to a far-reaching decision.
The three sons of founder David W. Friesen made their employees owners of the company.
Today, this small business in Altona, Manitoba, still has those approximately 600 employees.
Employee ownership is good for business.
In the past 20 years, the company has always made a profit, says CEO Curwin Friesen, who is not related to the founding family.
Friesens Corporation is Canada ’s largest printer of hardcover books.
The company has won several awards for the high quality of its art and coffee table books.
Friesens relies mainly on German technology, such as printing presses manufactured by Heidelberg and Man Roland and bookbinding technology from Kolbus.
Friesens is known for investing heavily in its machinery.
That is why the renowned Canadian nature photographers Rosemarie and Pat Keough chose Friesens to print a 366-page portfolio of color photographs that weighs 13 kilograms and sells for 4,300 Swiss francs.
The Keoughs were impressed by the employees’commitment and skills:
“They bent over backward to help us.”
The Friesen family is descended from Dutch Mennonites who immigrated to Canada via Prussia and Russia in 1870.
According to CEO Curwin Friesen, the decision to make their employees owners of the company was motivated by the family ’s religious beliefs and the tradition of cooperatives in western Canada.
To survive and thrive in the prairie province of Manitoba, the immigrant settlers had to support each other.
The company ’s stock is held by a foundation owned by the employees.
The foundation distributes dividends to the employees:
“When the company does well financially, so do the employees,” says CEO Friesen, and this ownership structure is a major incentive for them.
For example, if work needs to be done on the weekend, there are always people ready to step in.
“They work harder and make fewer mistakes.”
The employees were taught what it means to be the company ’s owners.
“Owning shares in a company does n’t mean that you run the business,” Friesen notes.
That is the responsibility of the board of directors and the management.
But dialogue is encouraged within the company, he says, and new ideas are welcome.
As early as the 1950s, with a workforce of 20, the Friesen sons had issued shares to their employees.
But they in turn sold them or traded them for goods and services, which was not the point of the exercise.
As a result, the founder ’s heirs ultimately established the foundation.
When employees leave the company, they must sell back their shares.
Curwin Friesen acknowledges that this sort of structure makes it impossible to raise capital on the market, as a listed company can do.
But when the company belongs to its employees, everyone works toward the same goal, he says.
“This system rewards the workers for the company ’s success.”
(Text:
Bernadette Calonego)
CEO Curwin Friesen in the employee-owned printing company.
Name
WeiTec
Industry
Mold manufacturing
Where
Dietlikon, Switzerland/Ningbo, China
Employees
Founded
Complexity as Opportunity
“Think globally, act locally.”
This popular saying makes globalization sound simple and promising.
The management boards of many large companies see it that way.
In truth, however, what matters is people, and this is where the challenges come in.
Each culture not only has a different language, but also different ideas about reliability and about when the working day starts and ends.
WeiTec benefits from this.
The company is based in Dietlikon, but is it a Swiss company or a Chinese company?
Or even a German company?
Company founder and CEO Othmar Weibel, 64, describes the business model:
“Most of our customers are German, and they receive advice and service from Switzerland.
We manufacture in China, but the customers do n’t notice this – except for the lower prices.”
WeiTec – short for Weibel Technology – is a supplier to the automobile industry, working primarily for the major German car manufacturers:
Audi, BMW, Mercedes and Porsche.
“The individual parts of a vehicle consist of precisely formed steel, aluminum, or plastic,” says Weibel.
“We are responsible for making molds and tools to produce these parts.
These can weigh up to 20 metric tons, and are produced in China.
We also support the development process, from optimizing parts to global after-sales service.”
In early 2000, the German automotive industry was under pressure to lower its production costs.
At the same time, they were growing fast in China and had a need for forms that met German standards.
But how to achieve this?
Othmar Weibel had more than 30 years of international business experience in Europe, the US, Brazil and Japan, but he first went to China in 2003.
WeiTec learned the hard way:
“We started a little more than ten years ago and made all the typical mistakes.
We signed very large contracts without understanding the local business mentality.
We were never paid.
We were confronted with a lot of projects – we said ‘ yes’too often and got involved with the wrong people.
We thought we understood the Chinese mindset.”
Today, WeiTec has found the recipe for success.
The company employs Chinese engineers, and the mold makers are hired on a project basis.
“This saves us the fixed costs for the huge machines,” says CEO Weibel.
But the model requires state-of-the-art technology and project management, as well as a strong local presence at the mold makers.
Close supervision ensures quality and on-time delivery.
Several inspection visits a week are necessary for the mold makers, despite many years of partnership.
The greatest advantage of production in China?
“Exceptionally hard work and high energy,” says Othmar Weibel.
“The Chinese work around the clock if they have to.
If you give the Chinese the right information, and instruct them correctly, you can achieve the unthinkable:
very good quality, in a short time, and for a great price.”
The greatest disadvantage?
“I had to learn that the average Chinese worker feels most comfortable when you give him precise instructions.
It ’s tough when I want to try something new and I say:
“Go for it!”
They are n’t used to taking on responsibility, since creativity entails a risk.
The workers do n’t yet understand that good project management offsets the risk.”
Weibel, who has an engineering degree from the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich, laments the huge gap between bosses and employees in China.
“It can be years before an employee feels comfortable sharing even the slightest bit of doubt with the boss about a work method or a product.
I would love to get that kind of feedback!
But we have found a way to harmonize the Swiss and Chinese cultures.
It ’s important that we take care of our Chinese employees.”
After all these years, does Othmar Weibel now understand the Chinese mentality?
“No, and I probably never will.
But I have learned how to work in China and appreciate its many advantages.”
(Text:
Simon Brunner)
* WeiTec is a portfolio entity of SVC – Ltd.
Company founder and CEO Othmar Weibel (right) learned the hard way.
First Nigeria, then the World
When Innocent Chukwuma told his friends, acquaintances and anyone else who would listen that he planned to sell cars in Nigeria, hardly anyone took him seriously.
Just a few years later, it was clear that Chukwuma, now 56 years old, and his company, Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing (IVM), had proved the pessimists wrong.
Chukwuma entered the business world at the age of 19.
For a few years, he worked as an apprentice for his older brother in a trading company for raw materials, but he soon began to trade for himself.
His company, which he named Innoson Nigeria Limited, imported replacement auto parts from Europe and Asia, selling them at a profit in Nigeria.
The year was 1981.
In the 1980s, Chukwuma discovered that lightweight motorcycles were sold at very high prices in Nigeria – about 750 Swiss francs.
“I added up the cost of all the components and discovered that this was too high.”
These motorcycles are the favorite means of transportation for lower-income people in Nigeria.
But because new ones are so expensive, many Nigerians buy used, unreliable machines.
With his experience in the replacement parts trade, Chukwuma began to buy not just spare parts, but also the chassis, motor, wheels and brakes, plus the tools needed to assemble them.
He also flew in experienced mechanics from China who taught his Nigerian employees how to build a motorcycle.
Thus, in 2009, his second company was born:
Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing (IVM).
A short time later, his company was able to assemble motorcycles in Nnewi, a small commercial town in southeastern Nigeria.
“Once we had built the motorcycles, we calculated their value and realized that we could more than halve the customary market price and still make good money,” says Chukwuma.
“Before we knew it, Innoson motorcycles were a hit – everyone wanted one.
We clobbered the competition.”
The next step was logical, says Chukwuma:
“When we realized how successful our motorcycle business was, we thought about what the next big thing might be.”
The resourceful entrepreneur had an idea:
“Most Nigerians buy used cars, because the new ones are too expensive.
The used ones are imported from Germany, the US and other countries.
I thought, maybe we should build the cars here in Nigeria as well; that would make them less expensive.
Then more Nigerians could afford a new car.”
Innoson began to import car engines from Japan, brakes and electronic components from Germany, China, Japan, Mexico and Canada – wherever he found price-conscious manufacturers.
Less technically demanding parts, such as the body, the floor components or the seats, were purchased from local manufacturers.
Today, 70 percent of the parts for a car or motorcycle from IVM are made in Nigeria, and the share is steadily rising.
For Chukwuma, this signals the emergence of a domestic auto industry.
But even this little industrial miracle has had its share of setbacks:
In the wake of Nigeria ’s economic crisis, IVM recently announced that it would have to let half its employees go.
Chukwuma remains buoyed by the success of his ideas.
First, he plans to sell cars in the other countries of West Africa, but “the goal is to capture the whole African market.
And then, the world.”
(Text:
Mfonobong Nsehe)
Name
Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing (IVM)
Industry
Auto Industry
Where
Nnewi, Nigeria
Employees
Founded
2009
Innovation and Production
Pieter Van Eenoge produces illustrations for magazines, books, posters and advertising.
He lives in Bruges, Belgium.
Who ’s giving Lindt ’s CEO reason to celebrate?
The acquisition of Russell Stover/Whitman ’s is helping Lindt ’s global growth gain momentum.
Find out how Credit Suisse could give you something to celebrate at credit-suisse.
com/lindt
Residence&amp;Apartments
How about an apartment where the breathtaking view is only the first thing on a long list of special features?
The new apartments on the Europaallee in Zurich boast more than just fantastic views – they also come complete with all the extras which make living in serviced accommodation so enjoyable.
Without even mentioning the restaurant, café and bar in the complex!
Interested?
Residence|Apartments|Restaurant|Bar|Café Gustav-Gull-Platz 5|8004 Zurich|T:
+ 41 (0) 44 250 65 00|info@gustav-zuerich.ch |gustav-zuerich.ch